In the summer of 1998, [1] New Jersey mobster Tony Soprano , a capo in the DiMeo crime family , is referred to a psychiatrist , Dr. Jennifer Melfi , after having a panic attack . Tony tells Melfi he is a waste management consultant, but she knows who he actually is. After Melfi establishes what will and will not fall under doctor-patient confidentiality , Tony begins to partly open up. Tony has recently been dealing with tensions between his wife Carmela and teenage daughter Meadow , as well as trying to keep his nephew, Christopher Moltisanti , in check. Tony's uncle, Corrado "Junior" Soprano , resents Tony for rising in the family hierarchy while he himself is in decline. Tony also has a strained relationship with his mother, Livia , who is resisting his advice to move into a retirement home. A confrontation with Livia triggers another panic attack, causing Tony to return to Melfi. He tells her about a family of ducks that were living in his swimming pool, but left when the ducklings fledged . Guided by Melfi, Tony realizes he is sad to see them go because he dreads losing his own family; to his consternation, this makes him cry. A Czech-American criminal organization is bidding against Tony for a waste management contract. Christopher unilaterally murders one of the Czechs, Emil Kolar , resulting in the Czechs withdrawing their bid. Junior wants to kill turncoat "Little Pussy" Malanga in a restaurant he frequents, owned by Tony's lifelong friend Artie Bucco . Thinking the murder would ruin the restaurant's reputation, Tony unsuccessfully tries to persuade Junior to carry out the hit at a different location. He then tries to get Artie to close the restaurant for three weeks by offering cruise tickets, but his wife Charmaine refuses them. Finally, Tony has his right-hand man Silvio Dante bomb the restaurant; Artie's reputation will not be damaged, and he will be able to claim insurance compensation. Mahaffey, an HMO employee and "degenerate gambler ," is in debt to Tony and Hesh Rabkin , an old Jewish friend of Tony's father . While driving with Christopher, Tony spots Mahaffey and runs him down, breaking his leg. He then concocts a scheme for Mahaffey's company to make insurance claims payable to non-existent clinics in order to pay off his debts, with which Mahaffey is forced to comply. At a birthday party for Tony's adolescent son A.J. , Christopher, frustrated about not receiving recognition for killing Kolar, tells Tony he is thinking of turning his life story into a Hollywood script, which Tony angrily forbids. As he drives Livia to the party, an embittered Junior says, "Something may have to be done about Tony." Livia doesn't say anything, but shows a hint of a smile.
After A.J.'s science teacher has his car stolen, Carmela persuades Tony to help find it. Tony tells Salvatore "Big Pussy" Bonpensiero , who runs an auto repair shop, to look out for the vehicle, a task Pussy resents. The thieves are found, but the car has been " chopped " so they are told to steal another one. The teacher is surprised when his car is returned with the same plates, but different keys and a different color. Christopher and Brendan Filone , who has a meth habit, hijack a shipment of DVD players . They deliver the goods to Tony, Silvio and Paulie Gualtieri at Silvio's strip club , the Bada Bing . However, the trucking company pays protection money to Uncle Junior , who angrily arranges a sit-down with Tony and the DiMeo family's acting boss , Jackie Aprile, Sr. Jackie rules that restitution must be made, which Tony accepts, but Christopher, who thinks he is due his button , attempts to reject the $15,000 that Junior claims. Tony insists on receiving the full amount, saying he will beat Junior down, but Christopher is aware that Tony will take some for himself, and little will be left for him and Brendan. Although they have been told not to attack the trucking company again, Christopher and Brendan, both high on cocaine , plan to hijack a shipment of Italian suits. However, when Brendan arrives to pick up his partner, Christopher, stoned and reflective, decides to sit the job out. Brendan proceeds with the hijacking along with two inexperienced associates. One of them drops his gun, which fires when it hits the ground, killing the driver. When Tony learns of this, he orders Christopher and Brendan to return the whole consignment to Junior and come to terms with him, though first his crew help themselves to a few of the suits. A small fire occurs when Livia is cooking. Tony insists that she accept a live-in nurse, but Livia soon enrages her and causes her to quit. While driving, Livia forgets to shift her car into reverse and badly injures a friend of hers to whom she has just given a lift; she is forced to move into the Green Grove retirement community . In her house, while collecting photos of himself as a child with his parents, Tony nearly has another panic attack. Although Tony himself tells his mother, "You've got to stop with this black poison cloud, because I can't take it anymore," he cannot bear hard words about her from Dr. Melfi . After Tony discloses his feelings of guilt, Melfi says that he must either acknowledge or displace his "feelings of hatred" toward his mother; he walks out. In the Bada Bing, when Georgie Santorelli , the bartender, clumsily uses the telephone in a manner similar to Livia, Tony grabs the handset and hits him with it.
Shlomo Teittleman , the head of a Hasidic Jewish family, approaches Tony when his son-in-law, Ariel, demands a 50% stake in a family-owned motel as his condition for a divorce. Tony agrees to remove Ariel's claim in return for a 25% stake. Ariel turns out to be very tough, both emotionally and physically, and will not yield despite being beaten by Silvio and Paulie . They consult Tony, who in turn consults Hesh , who obliquely suggests threatening him with castration ; Ariel yields. Teittleman then attempts to renegotiate the agreement, but Tony menacingly refuses. Jackie , who is dying from stomach cancer , has been hospitalized. Tony brings him a dancer from the Bada Bing , posing as a nurse, for a "private party". However, Jackie's condition continues to deteriorate and he is unable to think of anything else. Artie is still depressed by the loss of his restaurant ; the insurance company refuses to pay him out, suspecting arson . He and Charmaine cater a charity event at the Sopranos' home; an argument between him and Tony turns into a boyish food fight. During the event, Carmela offends Charmaine by seeming to treat her like a servant. Afterward, Charmaine confides to Carmela that, prior to his marriage, she slept with Tony. Meadow and one of her friends, Hunter Scangarelo , exhausted from choir practice and studying for the SATs , decide to purchase speed from Christopher . Christopher initially refuses, fearing Tony's wrath if he finds out; his girlfriend, Adriana La Cerva , convinces him to do it anyway, as the girls are likely to get adulterated and unsafe drugs from less trustworthy dealers. Christopher reluctantly agrees, stressing that Meadow must never speak of it. At the recital, Meadow and Hunter, showing subtle signs of amphetamine use, sing their brief solos successfully. After Christopher and Brendan return the stolen truck , Uncle Junior discusses what action to take next with his underling, Mikey Palmice , and with Livia . Obliquely, Livia advises Junior to punish Christopher and take drastic action against Brendan. Out alone one night, Christopher is seized by Russian thugs who prepare to kill him. He thinks they have been sent by Tony because he sold speed to Meadow. Terrified, he pleads for his life, but it is only a mock execution . Brendan is shot dead by Mikey; Junior glances at the body.
Tony becomes increasingly paranoid over his sessions with Dr. Melfi , especially after seeing Silvio leaving a dentist's office opposite her suite. He is also becoming attracted to Melfi and has corrupt police detective Vin Makazian secretly follow her. Makazian, who owes Tony money from gambling , assumes Melfi is Tony's mistress. When he sees her with a date he pulls the pair over, then assaults and arrests the man. Tony is beginning to consider quitting therapy, but Carmela —under the impression that Tony's therapist is male—insists he continue or risk their marriage. Christopher is scared after his mock execution leaves him in a neck brace . He becomes more unnerved when he and Adriana discover Brendan's body. Assuming that Tony is punishing him for giving speed to Meadow , he angrily confronts her; she assures him she has not told anyone. After finding that Uncle Junior and Mikey are responsible, Christopher is inflamed and wants revenge. Tony orders Christopher to stand down because Mikey is a made man , but then assaults Mikey himself. He then confronts Junior, who rejects an offer of compromise and tells him he should "come heavy" (i.e. with a gun) for his next visit or not at all. The prospect of war with Junior looms large for Tony, especially after Jackie , the DiMeo family's acting boss, dies without a clear successor. Tony has the backing of other DiMeo capos , but seeks a diplomatic resolution with his uncle. After some unwitting inspiration from Melfi about giving the elderly the "illusion of control", Tony cedes leadership of the family to Junior in exchange for his uncle's income-earning properties and contracts, so war within the family is avoided while Junior becomes the primary target for federal investigations. Content with his decision, Tony opts to remain in therapy. A.J. scuffles with a physically bigger classmate, Jeremy Piocosta. Jeremy backs down from a second formal fight and pays A.J. compensation for a shirt that was torn in the scuffle. A.J. is baffled by this. Meadow explains that Jeremy was not intimidated by A.J. but by Tony's reputation as a mobster. Tony had coincidentally run into Jeremy's father the day before at a plant nursery; Tony was friendly but happened to be holding an ax, and Jeremy's father quickly and nervously backed away. Meadow rhetorically asks A.J. how many other garbage men live in a house as expensive as theirs, and shows him a Mafia -themed website. At Jackie's funeral, Meadow gives A.J. a knowing look and nods in the direction of the federal agents taking pictures.
Tony takes Meadow on a trip to Maine to visit three colleges she is considering. During the drive, Tony is taken aback when she asks if he is "in the Mafia ", and he instinctively denies it. When Meadow is skeptical, he admits that a portion of his income is from illegal gambling and other activities. Meadow admits that she took speed to study for her SATs but, when Tony reacts angrily, will not say where she got it. Both seem relieved by this mutual honesty on difficult topics. At a gas station, Tony thinks he spots Fabian "Febby" Petrulio, a former member of the DiMeo family who entered witness protection after turning state's evidence . Tony contacts Christopher to run the plate number from his car and finds that he now goes by the alias "Fred Peters". Tony resolves to locate and execute Febby while continuing his trip with Meadow. He leaves her with some students she has met and confirms Febby's identity when, in the office of his travel business, he sees a carved bust —a hobby of his when he was in the DiMeo family. Febby, who feels someone is watching him, finds the motel where Tony and Meadow are staying and aims a handgun at Tony, who suspects nothing; the presence of two other guests prevents him from taking the shot. The next morning, Tony drops off Meadow for an interview. He finds Febby at his office and garrotes him. Later, during a drive to another college, Meadow asks Tony about the mud on his shoes and a cut on his hand. She can tell he is not answering honestly, and after a time asks no more questions. While Tony and Meadow are away, and with A.J. sleeping over at a friend's house, Father Phil Intintola , the Soprano family's priest, visits the house to enjoy Carmela's cooking and wine. Dr. Melfi phones to reschedule Tony's appointment; Carmela, discovering that Tony's therapist is a woman, assumes that he is sleeping with her. During confession , Carmela tells Father Phil about her fears for her family and her soul, and he administers communion . She sips the wine; he drains the cup. They fall asleep together on the sofa; half-waking, they are about to kiss, but Father Phil suddenly desists and walks swaying to the toilet, where he retches. He spends the rest of the night on the sofa. In the morning, Carmela firmly says, "We didn't do anything." Tony and Meadow return that day. Carmela tells Tony that Father Phil stayed the night. She counters his sarcastic comments by telling him that Melfi called.
Mikey beats up the leader of a card game that had been protected by Jimmy Altieri , a DiMeo family capo . While Uncle Junior is being fitted for a new suit, his tailor tells him that his 14-year-old grandson committed suicide after taking drugs sold to him by Rusty Irish , who works for DiMeo capo "Larry Boy" Barese . Junior has him killed, even though he is Larry Boy's top earner. Prompted by Livia , Junior tells Hesh that he must now, for the first time, make payments to him. Hesh goes to Tony , who goes to Johnny Sack , the underboss in New York's Lupertazzi crime family . They negotiate with Junior, who reduces his demands, and Hesh agrees to pay. The other DiMeo capos are resentful because Junior is keeping too much money for himself. Tony speaks to Junior, who agrees to pass Hesh's tribute money down to his capos. Tony gives his share of this money back to Hesh. Tony loses his libido as a side effect of his medication. Carmela , and Tony's mistress Irina , become very discontented. Tony also starts having erotic dreams about Dr. Melfi and believes he is in love with her. He tries to kiss her during a session, then has her aging car stolen and returned with a new starter. Carmela admits to Tony that she is jealous that his therapist can help him but she cannot. Tony tells Carmela that she is his life, and they reconcile. Junior celebrates his promotion to boss with a banquet. A waiter has a button camera and takes photos for the FBI , which are affixed to a bulletin board mapping out the hierarchy of the DiMeo family.
At their Catholic school , A.J. and his friends steal sacramental wine and turn up drunk at gym class . Tony , who is shaking down a foreman at a construction site, is called to the school and sees the psychologist along with Carmela . They are told that A.J. may have attention deficit disorder . Tony scornfully rejects this diagnosis and says A.J. is behaving like a normal 13-year-old. Carmela supports his opinion and they both walk out of the psychologist's office. Further misbehavior by A.J. during a dinner with Livia results in him being grounded. Tony contemplates talking to his son about the family business . He flashes back to his own childhood, around the time of the 1967 Newark riots , when he witnessed his father Johnny Boy and uncle Junior viciously beat a man named Rocco Alatore. During a session with Dr. Melfi , Tony implies that his parents were abusive . As A.J. begins his psychological testing, Carmela tells Tony that he may have to go into special education . An argument ensues between the couple over which parent is to blame for A.J.'s problems, causing Carmela to storm off. As part of his punishment, A.J. visits Livia at the Green Grove retirement community . Having overheard his parents talking about Tony's therapy, A.J. innocently tells his grandmother, who assumes that Tony is discussing her with the psychiatrist. She later tries to pass this information to Uncle Junior , but Tony happens to walk in before she can do so. Later, while changing a flat tire, Tony attempts to bond with A.J., who–having seen police photographers at Jackie Aprile, Sr.'s funeral–asks whether he is in the Mafia. Tony says that he isn't like Jackie, who he calls a "complicated man." During another session with Melfi, Tony expresses concern that he and A.J. inherited reckless tendencies from Johnny Boy. He recalls traumatic memories of Livia threatening to gouge out his eye with a fork, and of witnessing Johnny Boy's arrest at a mob-run fairground. Tony states that despite the arrest he is proud of being Johnny Boy's son, while acknowledging that A.J. doesn't have to be like him. Tony also recalls an argument between his parents when Rocco, the man Johnny Boy had beaten up, offered him a job in Reno, Nevada . Tony visits Livia at Green Grove to ask about Rocco, but she alludes to knowing about Tony's psychiatrist. A.J.'s psychological testing confirms that he has borderline ADD. Learning from his experiences and therapy over the last few days, Tony resolves to spend more time with his son and prove that he doesn't have to be like his own father.
At his daughter's wedding, Larry Boy tells Tony and his crew that, according to his source in the FBI , federal indictments will soon be handed down against the DiMeo crime family . One by one the capos gather their families, say goodbye to the tearful bride, and leave the ceremony early. Tony and Carmela swiftly collect cash and guns from different parts of their house while Meadow and A.J. watch. Tony hides it all in Livia's room at the Green Grove retirement community . The Soprano residence is searched by an FBI team led by Agent Dwight Harris . Having dinner after the search, Tony explains to his children that Italians and Italian-Americans are not given the respect they deserve. Dr. Melfi , at a dinner with her own family, says a few careless words which allow her ex-husband to deduce that one of her patients is a mobster. He urges her to drop Tony, deploring the way a few thousand gangsters have tarnished the good name of millions of Italian-Americans. Tony has told Dr. Melfi he might go on vacation and miss a session without notice; she understands what he means. He misses one, and the next time they meet, she tells him that, as previously agreed, she will still charge him. Angry, Tony scatters dollar bills on the floor and leaves. In nightmares, Christopher is haunted by Emil Kolar . He enlists Georgie to help dig up and relocate Emil's body. Meanwhile, Christopher is struggling to write a Mafia screenplay ; he states that the characters have no arc and feels there is no arc in his own life. Christopher shoots a clerk in the foot for making him wait too long. Tony is initially furious but calms down as he tries to question Christopher about his feelings. Christopher is resentful that he is not listed as one of those being investigated by the FBI. When his name finally appears in the newspaper, he is thrilled. Livia divulges to Uncle Junior that Tony is seeing a psychiatrist, adding, "I don't want there to be any repercussions." [1] [2]
Uncle Junior goes to Boca Raton , Florida , taking along his long-time girlfriend Bobbi Sanfillipo . In bed, she playfully tells him, "When you kiss me down there , you're like a great artist." He stresses that she must never speak about this to anyone, and reluctantly explains that his associates "think if you suck pussy ... it's a sign of weakness." However, Bobbi has already spoken about her sex life with a woman at her nail salon. Word reaches Carmela , who goes to the same nail salon, and she tells Tony . While playing golf with Junior, Tony makes vulgar, oblique jokes about it. Junior realizes what is happening and contemplates killing him. Enraged, he fires Bobbi from her job and breaks up with her. Tony, Silvio , and Artie invite Meadow's soccer coach, Don Hauser, to have drinks at the Bada Bing after a victory. They all have daughters on the team and are enthusiastic supporters. When they read in the newspaper that Hauser is moving to another coaching job, they try to convince him to stay. Paulie delivers a 50-inch television to Hauser's house and insists he take it, while Christopher keeps the coach's dog captive in his car and then, as "an animal lover," returns it. Tony tells Meadow he thinks the coach is going to change his mind about leaving, but she appears to be ungrateful and upset. When he remonstrates, she tells him that Hauser is having sex with one of her teammates. Tony resolves that Hauser will never do that again. Dr. Melfi asks him, "Why do you think punishing this man falls on you?" Artie tries to show Tony that he is not acting for justice, only for vengeance and his own satisfaction. Tony throws Artie out, but stays alone drinking, wondering what to do. Later that evening, Hauser is arrested. Tony goes home, staggering drunk. He tells Carmela he "didn't hurt nobody" as Meadow watches from the staircase.
Paulie , Christopher and Pussy rob and kill a Colombian drug dealer. They gain a huge amount of cash; as Tony says, a once-in-a-lifetime score. Christopher and Adriana meet Massive Genius , a wealthy gangster rapper , and Christopher arranges a sit-down for him with Hesh Rabkin . Massive says he is acting on behalf of the mother of a deceased black singer whose royalties Hesh stole, and now claims $400,000. Hesh refuses, and threatens a counterclaim : there is an unauthorized sampling by Massive's record label of a song, the copyright of which is owned by Hesh's label. Massive says he will see Hesh in court. When the conversation is over, Tony and his crew jeer at a self-proclaimed gangster who works within the legal system. Adriana proposes that she should pursue a career as a music producer and that Massive can help. Christopher, flush with money, agrees to finance a demo for the band Visiting Day, whose singer, Richie Santini , is Adriana's ex-boyfriend. The demo recording progresses slowly and Christopher smashes Richie's guitar over his back in frustration. Christopher is told by Hesh that the band is not good and realizes that Massive is helping them only because of his sexual interest in Adriana. When he tells her this, Adriana accuses him of trying to hold her back and storms out. Carmela wonders whether she and her children will be alright if anything happens to Tony, but he reassures her. A friend introduces her to the stock market and gives her a tip; she buys and profits. Tony, keen to mix with meddigans (white Americans not of Italian descent) accepts an invitation from his neighbor and family physician, Dr. Bruce Cusamano , to play a round of golf at a country club along with his friends. They pester Tony with questions about organized crime. As he later tells Dr. Melfi , he feels he is being "used for somebody else's amusement, like a dancing bear." In revenge, Tony persuades Dr. Cusamano to keep a package (of sand) safely for him, pretending it contains something sinister.
Pussy is at Jimmy Altieri's social club when FBI agents conduct a raid and find a stash of guns. Jimmy and Pussy are both arrested, and Pussy is released on bail soon after. Vin Makazian relays intelligence to Tony that Pussy is an FBI informant. Tony doesn't want to believe it, but Vin points out how easily Pussy managed to get off from the raid. Tony insists on seeing the official report with Pussy's name on it, but Vin is unable to obtain it. Pussy has stopped collecting payments because of back pain but Paulie , who sees the same doctor, has been told there is nothing wrong with Pussy's back. Tony asks Dr. Melfi's opinion; back pain, she says, might be caused by stress, such as the burden of a secret. Tony tells Paulie not to act until Pussy's wire is seen, so Paulie insists that Pussy go to a bathhouse with him; Pussy refuses to undress, saying that his doctor told him that heat is bad for him. Silvio discovers that Vin owes Pussy $30,000, which he believes may be his motive to have Pussy "disappear." Tony visits Pussy at home and questions him sympathetically, but Pussy doesn't respond. Tony is distrustful and confused; he tells Paulie he feels he is walking into walls. Vin has a personal relationship with the madam of a bordello , and he is there when the police raid it. After his release from custody, Vin commits suicide by jumping off a bridge. Jimmy is bailed out and visits Tony at his home; Tony is surprised that he was freed so soon. Jimmy asks some intrusive questions about the Colombian drug heist . Tony evades the questions, which confirm his suspicion that Jimmy is the rat: he and Pussy were arrested at the same time, and Vin's source mixed up the "two fat fucks with black hair." Pussy is no longer suspected, but he has disappeared. Uncle Junior visits Livia , who is bitter that Tony has sold her house. She tells Junior that several capos have placed their mothers at the Green Grove retirement community and hold meetings there. Junior instantly suspects that they are conspiring with Tony against him and decides that he has to act. He assigns Mikey and Chucky Signore to find hitmen from out of town.
Tony , deeply depressed after Pussy's unexplained disappearance, sees a beautiful Italian woman in the Cusamanos' backyard next door. She tells him her name is Isabella and that she is an exchange student staying there while the Cusamanos are away. Tony takes her out to lunch and she describes the beauty of Avellino , where Tony's grandfather came from. He has a daydream about Isabella in a rocking chair in a village house, nursing a baby named Antonio. One day, Isabella is no longer there. When the Cusamanos return, Tony asks about her and realizes he has been hallucinating. Dr. Melfi instructs him to stop taking lithium and theorizes that Isabella was an idealized maternal figure. Mikey , acting through Donnie Paduana , contracts two gunmen to carry out the hit on Tony. Uncle Junior cannot bear to hear the details of the plan when Mikey tries to report. Meanwhile, Christopher is concerned about Tony's emotional state and secretly follows him; he unknowingly prevents the hit when he pulls his car up next to the assassins', blocking their view of Tony. Mikey and Donnie urgently meet about the failed attempt, with Junior hiding in the backseat of Mikey's car. Donnie promises the hit will be the next day and casually remarks that even Tony's mother wants him dead. Junior, fearing Donnie's "big mouth", has Mikey kill him. The next day, the assassins make their move while Tony is running errands. In a ferocious struggle, one of them is killed and the other is briefly dragged along the street as Tony tries to drive away. Tony evades the gunmen but crashes into a parked car. At the hospital, Tony says that his minor injuries occurred in an attempted carjacking , a story that not even A.J. believes. FBI Agent Harris comes to his bed and offers a deal, including immunity from prosecution , which Tony scornfully rejects. The next day, Livia and Junior call on Tony at home. Livia claims that she doesn't know who Meadow is; Junior later comments on the "good timing" of this apparent memory loss.
Jimmy's behavior at a meeting convinces Tony and Uncle Junior that he is an FBI informant. Jimmy is lured into a trap by Christopher and killed by Silvio ; his body is dumped in an alley with a dead rat stuffed into his mouth. Knowing that Tony's life is in danger, Dr. Melfi openly speculates about Livia , noting that she often speaks of infanticide and suggesting that she has a borderline personality disorder . Tony angrily rejects this, physically threatens Melfi, and storms out. Tony is brought to an FBI safehouse where Agent Frank Cubitoso reveals that Livia's room at the Green Grove retirement home has been bugged. He plays audio recordings that confirm Tony's suspicions that the attempt on his life was planned by Uncle Junior , who was goaded by Livia. Tony returns to Melfi, explaining that the attempted hit occurred partly because he was seeing her, and telling her to leave town. He then confides to his crew that he is seeing a psychiatrist. Though Silvio and Paulie accept it, Christopher cannot and walks out. Tony and his crew then begin to retaliate against Junior's crew, killing Mikey and Chucky . However, Junior and the rest of his crew are then arrested; Tony's lawyer tells him that he was not indicted because the charges relate to a stock fraud scam in which he was not involved. Junior is offered a lesser charge if he confesses that Tony is the de facto boss of the DiMeo crime family , but he refuses. Carmela sees that Father Phil is now close to Jackie Aprile's widow Rosalie . When he calls on Carmela, knowing that she is alone, she rebuffs him, accusing him of taking advantage of spiritually thirsty women. Crushed, he leaves. When Artie visits Livia at Green Grove, she divulges Tony's role in burning down his restaurant . Artie then angrily confronts Tony with a rifle , but Tony manages to persuade him that his mother is unreliable and confused. Though still enraged, Artie destroys the rifle and leaves. As time passes, his rebuilt restaurant is a success, and he finds peace. Tony goes to Green Grove and grabs a pillow, intending to smother his mother. However, Livia has just had a stroke and is wheeled past Tony on a gurney. Discarding the pillow, he leans very close to her face and whispers that he knows what she did. The staff haul him off as he shouts, "Look at her face, she's smiling!" Later that night, Tony and his family go to Artie's restaurant to wait out a thunderstorm. After a little hesitation, he welcomes them. As they eat by candlelight, Tony raises his glass to "the little moments that were good".
Several months after Mikey Palmice's execution, Livia Soprano's hospitalization, and Uncle Junior's arrest, business appears to be returning to normal for the DiMeo crime family . Tony Soprano is no longer receiving therapy from Dr. Jennifer Melfi and is self-medicating. When his mother is mentioned, Tony insists that she is dead to him. Money is still coming in from Ray Curto , Paulie Gualtieri and Silvio Dante , while Phillip Parisi is killed for spreading gossip about Tony, his mother and his uncle. Tony's older sister Janice arrives from Seattle . Tony is apprehensive because he knows she will make financial demands, but he lets her stay at his home. At a family gathering, Carmela smiles as she watches Tony embracing Janice and his younger sister, Barbara . Janice is interested in Livia's will and her house; Tony is trying to sell the house and suspects that Janice is trying to obstruct the sale. Tony's mood worsens after Janice comes. While driving, he passes out and runs off the road. He consults a new psychiatrist, who tells Tony that he recognizes him and is not taking new patients. He phones Melfi in the motel room where she is seeing patients, and tells her things are now safe; she is frightened, realizing that he knows where she is. Tony confronts her in a diner and tries to apologize. Melfi states that one of her other patients committed suicide because her treatment was disrupted, and angrily tells Tony to "get out of my life." Christopher Moltisanti hires someone to take his stockbroker's licensing exam and becomes the SEC compliance officer for a boiler room conducting a " pump and dump " scam. He is assisted by two young men eager to make a mark, Matt Bevilaqua and Sean Gismonte . While Christopher is out of the office, the pair beat a broker for providing genuine investment advice. Tony rebukes Christopher, telling him to take his responsibilities seriously, but ends the meeting with a smile. Big Pussy Bonpensiero appears at Tony's house one morning. In his basement, Pussy explains that he has been in Puerto Rico having his back treated and got involved with a woman there. He expresses his resentment at being suspected of turning informant . Tony is initially furious that he has not been in touch. He pats him down while giving him a hug; when Pussy is offended, he pulls him in for a real one. He allows Pussy to start earning again but remains suspicious, though his story appears to check out.
Jack Massarone's construction company, which provides no-show jobs to Tony , is being picketed by black protesters led by Reverend Herman James, Jr. In return for payment by Massarone, Tony sends some thugs who brutally beat up the protesters. In fact, Tony and Reverend James are colluding, and they split the payment. Meanwhile, Pussy meets with his FBI handler, Agent Skip Lipari , and attempts to stall Lipari's demands for information. Tony visits Uncle Junior in jail. Junior tries to convince Tony that Livia had nothing to do with the attempted hit and urges him to make peace with her. Tony mocks him for being manipulated by Livia. Tony tells Junior's aide, Bobby "Bacala" Baccalieri , that Junior will keep the title of boss and will be permitted to "earn" on a "subsistence level"; the rest will be Tony's. Junior's release from prison on medical grounds is obtained, but he is placed under house arrest with an ankle monitor . Junior conducts business at his doctor's office, which cannot be bugged . At an ostensible appointment there, Junior tells Tony that the owner of Livia's former nursing home, Freddie Capuano, has been gossiping about Junior himself, Livia, and Tony. Capuano disappears; a state trooper finds his abandoned Cadillac , with his toupée lying nearby. Janice continues to visit Livia in the hospital. They antagonize each other, but when Janice plays old music that Livia loves, they bond for the first time in years. Livia speaks of the money she has hidden; she doesn't remember where. Tony contemptuously tells Janice they deserve each other; she can live with Livia in Livia's house when she leaves the hospital. During a visit to his grandmother, A.J. innocently mentions DNR . Questioning him, Livia realizes that Janice and Tony are considering a DNR instruction for her. One evening, Junior slips in the shower and is badly hurt. He speaks of his guilt to Tony and again urges him to make peace with Livia. He will not accept an ambulance but allows Tony to carry him to his car and drive him to the emergency room .
Dr. Melfi becomes tipsy while dining in a restaurant with some female friends. On the way out, she sees Tony at a table with his companions and awkwardly attempts small talk. Leaving, she waves and calls "Toodle-oo!" The men make crude comments about her, and Tony pretends she is an old girlfriend. Melfi is mortified by her own behavior and acknowledges to her therapist, Dr. Elliot Kupferberg , that in order to evade her responsibility as a therapist, she behaved like "a ditzy young girl." Meadow throws a party for a few friends in Livia's house. However, the party spins out of control when a lot of uninvited people show up, leading to drug use and heavy drinking. The police arrive, and an officer who knows Tony contacts him. Tony finds Meadow drunk and drives her home, but he and Carmela do not know how to punish her. She prompts them to take away her credit card for three weeks, while still providing cash for gas. She walks away, smiling to herself. At first, Janice defends Meadow, saying she is showing her independence, but when she sees the state of the house, she is furious. Tony and Carmela tell her to stop interfering with their parenting. Janice says she ought to leave, but she and Carmela reconcile and she is persuaded to continue to stay at the house. Meadow overhears their argument and, when Tony goes to the house to have the locks changed, he finds her scrubbing the floor. He turns away, perplexed by this remorse. Jackie Aprile's older brother Richie is released after ten years' imprisonment. He says he has mellowed out by taking up meditation and yoga , but he cannot accept that Tony, a younger man, is now the boss of the DiMeo crime family . Richie also resents that he does not have the same privileges he enjoyed before his imprisonment. When Tony says these things will come in time, Richie says, "What's mine is not yours to give me." Richie demands payments from a former associate, "Beansie" Gaeta , now a pizzeria proprietor. When Beansie refuses, Richie viciously assaults him. Another night, he waits in a parking lot and threatens Beansie with a gun, but he manages to escape. Later, when Beansie returns to his car, Richie rams into him and then drives over him as he lies on the ground. In the hospital, Beansie is told he may never walk again. Tony asserts his authority over Richie and tells him there will be a problem if he does not show respect. Between the two assaults on Beansie, Richie meets with Uncle Junior and pledges his loyalty to him. Richie happens to meet Janice at a yoga class and begins trying to revive the relationship they had years ago.
Tony goes to Naples with Paulie and Christopher to negotiate the smuggling of stolen luxury cars to Italy with a local Camorra family distantly related to the Sopranos. Tony's contact there is Furio Giunta , a local mobster who speaks English. Tony learns that Don Vittorio, the boss of the Naples family, is senile; his son-in-law, Mauro Zucca, had been in charge but is now serving life in prison . It is hard for Tony to accept that Annalisa —Vittorio's daughter and Mauro's wife—is the de facto head of the family. Tony negotiates with Annalisa, naming his price for the cars, asking that Furio be sent to work for him in the United States as a zip and that others be sent in the future as he requires. Annalisa scoffs at his proposition. Later, Annalisa comes on to Tony, but he tells her he wishes to keep their relationship professional. He then lowers his price for the cars in exchange for Furio and any subsequent men; she agrees. Meanwhile, Paulie tries to rediscover his roots only to uncover a distaste for Italy, while Christopher is high on heroin almost all the time. Carmela is resentful that Tony has not taken her to Italy. She has lunch with Rosalie Aprile and Angie Bonpensiero , where Angie shares how unhappy she is that Pussy has returned. Pussy is indifferent to his wife even though she is awaiting the result of a biopsy . Angie admits she has thoughts of suicide and that she intends to divorce him. Carmela later visits Angie and urges her not to break the sacrament of marriage. While with his FBI handler, Agent Skip Lipari , Pussy runs into Jimmy Bones, a Soprano associate. They concoct a cover story, but Pussy is afraid that Jimmy won't believe it. He goes to Jimmy's house and beats him to death with a ball-peen hammer . Pussy then goes home with a bouquet for Angie, but after a short pause she beats him with it. Tony returns home. Carmela is upstairs, doing housework. He calls her. After a short pause, she goes to greet him.
Adriana is proud of Christopher's screenwriting and enrolls him in an acting course. He is applauded for his acting in an emotional scene in which he plays a son with his father. When a student asks him how he managed to seemingly cry on cue, an embarrassed Christopher walks out. In the next class, while playing another scene with the student who had played his father, Christopher violently beats him. Adriana suggests this was because he was angry with his father for dying when Christopher was young. That night he throws away everything he has written. Furio Giunta is now in New Jersey , a soldier with the DiMeo crime family . Christopher has been making collections from the owner of a tanning salon that is used to front a brothel, but payments have been short. Tony sends Furio to obtain the money owed. Furio breaks the owner's arm and shoots him in the kneecap, then hits and spits on his wife. With Furio's arrival, Tony promotes Paulie and Silvio , but refuses to promote Pussy . Pussy sees this as a betrayal and complains about it to Agent Lipari , who feels he has been passed over in his job as well. Sympathizing with each other, each complains about the declining standards of his own organization. Tony becomes irate when he learns that Janice is using their mother's house as security for a loan. He goes to the house early one morning to confront her. He is taken aback when the door is opened by Richie , who says that he and Janice have revived their previous relationship. Tony leaves, saying with disgust, "She's your fucking problem now." Tony visits Hesh Rabkin , seeking the comfort and guidance from him that he is not getting from Dr. Melfi . Hesh is sympathetic and tells Tony that Tony's father also had panic attacks . However, Hesh gets bored listening to Tony and rambles on about his own experiences. Dr. Melfi consults Dr. Kupferberg in order to understand her feelings about Tony. Eventually, she decides to resume treating him. During their first session, while questions are being asked and answered, it seems they cannot stop smiling at each other.
Tony tells Dr. Melfi that he is angry with everybody, but doesn't know why; he wants to hit her, and the happy-looking people he sees in the street. Tony is told by Uncle Junior that he and Tony's father had a deceased brother, Ercole, who was, in Junior's words, "slow". He also tells him that his father left a "package" of money to his mother, Livia . Tony is uncomfortable when he sees Livia at a funeral and later during a cabaret night at Meadow's high school. Davey Scatino is a former classmate of Tony's who owns a sporting goods store; his son, Eric, is a classmate of Meadow's and they are going to sing a duet at the school's cabaret night. Davey, a compulsive gambler, owes Richie Aprile $8,000 and has been banned from Richie's poker game until the debt has been paid. Davey knows that Tony has taken over the high-stakes "Executive Game" from Junior and asks to participate. Davey comes to the game uninvited, at which point Tony agrees and loans him $5,000. Davey initially wins and the game goes on through the night while Tony is asleep. Tony wakes in the morning and is told by Christopher that Davey is down $45,000 after talking his way into more loans. Richie comes to the room, sees Davey playing, and attacks him, which causes the game to break up. For this act of disrespect, Tony tells Richie that he is not permitted to collect his debt from Davey until Tony has collected his. Janice tells Richie he has a right to stand up to Tony. Davey attempts to talk to Tony as a friend, but Tony rebuffs him. When Davey misses the first deadline for payment, Tony goes to his office at the store and beats him. Davey finds a pretext to take Eric's SUV away from him and gives it to Tony as partial payment. Tony presents it to Meadow, but she realizes it belongs to Eric and tearfully rejects it. At the cabaret night, Eric refuses at the last minute to perform with Meadow and walks out, leaving Meadow to perform a solo, as she had wished.
Christopher and Adriana meet Christopher's cousin Greg and Greg's fiancée Amy. Amy, who is working with Jon Favreau on a film project in New York City , has been eager to meet Christopher and read his screenplay, saying that mob films are popular. She quickly becomes attracted to him. Adriana has kept a copy of the screenplay Christopher threw away and persuades him to pass it to Jon and Amy. Christopher and Adriana are invited to the film set, but he goes alone. He is absorbed by what he sees and makes a dialogue suggestion that Jon adopts. Jon wants to learn about mob customs and speech from Christopher. Christopher comes as arranged to meet him at his hotel room but he is not available, so Christopher calls on Amy instead. They talk, she begins to give advice about screenwriting, and they end up having sex. A few days later he sees her at the hotel and they go to her room to have sex again, but afterward, she is overcome by guilt. Christopher finds a screenplay by Jon and sees that he has stolen a mob anecdote that Christopher told him in confidence. Enraged, Christopher searches for him, but learns he has returned to California . In the following days, Amy does not reply to his messages. When he finally tracks her down; she tells him that Hollywood has lost interest in mob films and, "It was wrong, with us." In a heated argument, he calls her a "D-Girl". She replies that she is a vice president and walks away. A.J. takes his mother's car without permission and damages it. When his parents rebuke him, he baffles them by stating that life is absurd and he does not wish to be confirmed because " God is dead ." Tony consults Pussy , who is A.J.'s godfather and confirmation sponsor; Pussy says that at that age "they get broody." Tony consults Dr. Melfi , who explains that A.J. has discovered existentialism . A.J. consults his grandmother Livia , who tells him not to expect happiness and that everyone dies alone; "It's all a big nothing." Pussy is forced by the FBI to wear a wire at A.J.'s confirmation and the ensuing reception at the Soprano residence. During the reception, Tony discovers A.J. and two friends smoking marijuana in the garage. Pussy goes up to A.J.'s room, where he is sulking, and gently tells him that his father is a good man; A.J. is young and should enjoy life. He hugs him and sends him back down to the party, but Pussy himself goes into the bathroom and sobs. Adriana has inadvertently told Tony about Christopher's screenwriting. Christopher misses the confirmation ceremony and arrives late for the reception. Tony then tells him he has a choice: either follow his other interests (and never see him again) or give up his interests and completely commit himself to Tony. Christopher goes out and thinks it over, then goes back inside to Tony and the mob.
Meadow hopes to go to Berkeley ; her parents Tony and Carmela want to prevent it. Their neighbor, Jean Cusamano , has a sister, Joan O'Connell, who is a prestigious alumna of Georgetown University . Carmela cajoles Jean into asking Joan to write a letter of recommendation for Meadow. Joan declines, but Carmela visits her, presents her with a ricotta pie, and insists, "I want you to write that letter." Jean reports to Carmela that the letter has been written, and Carmela asks for a copy. Silvio and Paulie pressure Richie to build Beansie a wheelchair ramp for his house, as partial reparation for crippling him . Richie scornfully refuses, but when he learns that these instructions came from Tony, he sends his nephew Vito Spatafore and his construction workers to fully adapt Beansie's house. Richie has a leather jacket which he obtained years ago from the feared mobster Rocco DiMeo . He gives it to Tony, who accepts it reluctantly but politely. Richie attaches great importance to the jacket, and to the act of giving it to Tony. He later sees it being worn by the husband of the Sopranos' maid and is deeply offended. Adriana , embarrassed in a restaurant by Christopher , has left him and gone back to her mother's. Christopher goes to her, proposes marriage, and presents her with a ring. She says she loves him, and the ring. In bed, he tells her, "I'm back on track, rededicating myself"—to her and to Tony. Matt and Sean continue to work with Christopher, breaking into safes . Having been subjected to various slights and snubs by members of the DiMeo family , they feel they are getting nowhere and must do something drastic. They ambush Christopher as he is leaving a diner, imagining that this will gain them favor with Richie. Christopher is shot three times and left unconscious; Sean is killed. Matt flees and asks for Richie's protection; Richie, furious, chases him away. As Christopher lies comatose in the hospital, Tony asks, "How could this happen?"
Christopher is in the hospital after being shot . He is clinically dead for about a minute and his spleen is removed, but he survives. Conscious but heavily medicated with morphine, he asks to see Tony and Paulie . He tells them he went to Hell and saw Brendan Filone and Mikey Palmice ; he also saw his father , who gets killed again every night. He reports that Filone and Palmice had a message for Tony and Paulie: "Three o'clock." Tony comforts Christopher, assuring him it was only a dream. Discussing his experience with Dr. Melfi , Tony says he does not think he or Christopher will go to Hell. He explains: " Soldiers don't go to Hell ... everybody involved knows the stakes and ... you gotta do certain things. It's business. We're soldiers." Paulie, however, is deeply disturbed. He tries to persuade Christopher it was only purgatory , not Hell, but still has nightmares about it. On his girlfriend's advice, he seeks the help of a psychic , who appears to have a terrifying knowledge of Paulie's past, including the name of the first man he ever killed thirty years before. Paulie complains to his priest that all the donations he has made to the church should have given him immunity; he will not donate anymore. Pussy has a bad-tempered meeting with Agent Skip Lipari . He tells him nothing but repeats his fear that Tony suspects him. An informer on the street tells him where Matt Bevilaqua is hiding, and he and Tony go there together. Tony questions Matt, establishing that Richie had no part in the attempt to kill Christopher, then shoots him. He glances at Pussy, who hesitates but shoots him too; they empty their guns into the lifeless body. They have dinner in a familiar restaurant and talk nostalgically of old times. While Christopher is near death, Carmela finds an empty hospital room with a crucifix and prays for him. When he is conscious, she tells him he has been given a second chance, but as they speak she realizes Tony lied when he told her that Christopher dreamed of going to Heaven . The women are gossiping about an associate of the Sopranos whose long-term comàre has had his child. Dreading the shame if such a thing happened to her own family, Carmela asks Tony to have a vasectomy . He vigorously refuses, and when he assures her that he has had his girlfriend tested for AIDS she leaves their bed in revulsion. Later, having reconsidered, he tells her he will consent – but to his bafflement, she has changed her mind. She says, "All I want is you. That's all I have ever wanted," and makes passionate love to him.
Dr. Melfi tells Tony that he seems scared. A witness has identified him as one of two men leaving the scene of Matt's murder, but after a press report that the murder is Mafia -related, the witness retracts his statement. Pussy has another acrimonious meeting with Agent Skip Lipari and denies that he was the second man. Lipari orders him to record Tony admitting to the murder. Tony and Richie subject Davey Scatino's store to a "bust out", using the store's credit to buy expensive merchandise with which to pay off his gambling debt, and doing so until the store goes bankrupt . Tony points out to Davey that the Executive Game was fair and that Davey could just as easily have won, but he is not consoled and is close to suicide. Richie is dissatisfied with the cut he is getting from Davey's store, and with the deal he has with the DiMeo family's sanitation business. Egged on by Janice , he approaches Uncle Junior with the idea of eliminating Tony. Junior admonishes him, but Richie points out that Junior himself planned to kill Tony the previous year. Tony visits Beansie in the hospital and insists on giving him $50,000. Davey's wife does not know about his disastrous debt to Tony. She is friends with Carmela and introduces her to her brother, Victor Musto. Carmela and Victor, who is recently widowed, are immediately attracted to each other. He is a housepainter, and she engages him to wallpaper part of her house. They suddenly kiss when they are alone in a small powder room. They agree that he will come alone the next day, without his assistant. That evening, Victor meets Davey, who confesses that he is ruined, in debt to Tony. The next day, only Victor's assistant comes to Carmela's house. In therapy with Melfi, Tony claims he is fine with going to jail, but only once his kids are grown, so that he is not an absentee father. One night in the kitchen, drunk, he reminds Meadow that he loves her. After some cruel words to A.J., Tony feels bad and tries to get closer to him. At first he resists, but they are happy together, speeding on Tony's boat.
Tony is advised by his lawyer, Neil Mink , to "insulate" himself from the "shenanigans" so he spends time at home, where he is bored, and then in the office of Barone Sanitation, where he is still bored, though he draws up an office basketball pool and has vigorous sex with the office assistant. Dr. Melfi is under heavy stress because of her relationship with Tony. She is drinking between sessions on the days that she sees him. Tony comments once, "You seem very mellow today. You look like you're on drugs." In a restaurant with her son, she creates a scene when she tries to stop another patron from smoking. She tells Dr. Kupferberg that, although she is repulsed by what Tony tells her, "I can't stop myself from wanting to hear it." Kupferberg prescribes medication and urges her again to cease treating this patient. Junior and Richie are selling cocaine on their garbage routes. Tony angrily tells Richie to stop, saying that this can draw FBI and DEA attention to their legitimate business. Richie glares at him before turning away. After this confrontation, Tony has a panic attack. He almost has another when he sees Janice behaving lovingly with Richie, who is now her fiancé. Thinking aloud, Tony says, "Oh, you poor bastard." One of Junior's drivers continues selling cocaine; Junior says he needs the income for legal and medical expenses. At the hospital, he is recognized by Catherine Romano, who was a classmate of his younger brother Johnny . She is now the widow – and the mother – of a police detective. At first, Junior evades her, embarrassed by his illnesses and house arrest. Eventually, he phones her, and in his home she affectionately looks after him. Tony returns to Satriale's , where his crew – including a now-discharged and nearly fully-recovered Christopher – welcomes him back.
Pussy turns against Tony , resenting the way he has been treated, and begins to behave like an FBI agent. Christopher and an associate are planning to hijack a shipment of Pokémon cards . Pussy spends the night trailing them and in the morning, sleepy, crashes into another car, injuring his knee and knocking down a cyclist. Skip Lipari gets him out of trouble but angrily rebukes him: his duty is only to collect evidence against Tony Soprano. Richie is penalized by Tony because he is still selling cocaine on his garbage routes, but for Junior the income from cocaine is his "lifeline". Richie suggests having Tony killed, and says he can muster support from other dissatisfied crews. Junior permits him to raise the matter with capo Albert "Ally Boy" Barese , who is not persuaded. Alone, Junior thinks it over: he calculates that Richie, failing to "sell" the plan to Albert, is not respected; he, Junior, is better off with Tony. He tips Tony off, and Tony starts planning a hit on Richie with Silvio . Richie and Janice spend a quarrelsome evening at home. She tells him that Tony does not want his children near him because of what he did to Beansie . Richie expresses disgust at the presumed homosexuality of his son, who is a dancer; Janice contradicts him, and he silences her with a punch to the mouth. She goes out of the room, comes back with a gun, shoots Richie once in the chest, and kills him with a second shot. In a panic, she phones Tony, who finds her crying over the body. He calls Chris and Furio to dispose of the body. They dismember it with the meat-cutting equipment at Satriale's . In the morning, Tony encounters Livia , in whose house Richie and Janice were staying, for the first time since her stroke . Tony explains that Richie has left; Livia smiles at a distraught Janice and says she knew it wouldn't last. The mother and son exchange hurtful recriminations. On his way out, Tony stumbles down the stoop and falls on the front walk, which instantly changes Livia's crying into soft laughter. Janice returns to Seattle. Carmela contrives a meeting with Victor . She says that one day she might be free and, as she leaves, kisses him lightly on the cheek. Victor is greatly relieved when she has gone. Loading the washing machine, Carmela smells Irina's perfume on Tony's clothes. But he has had enough of Irina and breaks up with her. In response, Irina attempts suicide with vodka and pills. He goes to the hospital and comforts her. He then sends Silvio with a parting gift of $75,000. Irina's cousin, Svetlana Kirilenko , urges her to accept it.
Tony is sick from food poisoning, and he has vivid fever dreams. In one he is having sex with Dr. Melfi in her office. In another, a dead fish on a slab speaks to him with Pussy's voice and says he is working for the government and Tony knows it; that is why Tony passed him over for promotion. As soon as he can, Tony goes with Silvio to Pussy's home. Pretending he is still sick, Tony rushes to the toilet; while the rest are downstairs, he searches the bedroom and finds Pussy's wire . Tony says he wants Pussy to see a boat he is thinking of buying, and the three of them drive to it. Paulie is already there. They take the boat out to open water.  In the cabin, Tony asks Pussy when he flipped. After hesitating, he says it was eighteen months ago, less, and he only supplied disinformation ; but he admits that he told them about the crew's current money-earning scam involving telephone calling cards. He asks for a drink and Tony permits it; he tells a smutty story and the guys laugh. He goes to the other end of the cabin and, while he is asking if he can sit down, Tony, followed by Silvio and Paulie, shoots him dead. Paulie removes his identifying jewelry, and together they bind his bagged body in chains and weights, throw him off the back of the boat, and watch him sink into the ocean. Meadow graduates from high school. At the ceremony, Tony tells Christopher that he is putting him up to become a made man . He also meets Davey , whose wife has left him: he is going to work "on a ranch out West" where there are flights to Las Vegas. His son, who was accepted by Georgetown University , is going to Montclair State University instead because of "a money pinch". Shortly after Janice's departure, Tony and his younger sister Barbara arrive at Livia's home to discuss her permanent living arrangements. Barbara's husband won't allow her to live with them and the retirement home will not have her back. Angrily, Tony gives her two airline tickets with which she and her sister can fly first-class to Tucson, where another sister is living. But the tickets were obtained through the bust-out of Davey's store, and Livia is detained at Newark International Airport for possessing stolen airline tickets. FBI agents arrive at Tony's home with a search warrant and he is led away handcuffed in front of Meadow and some of her friends. Her graduation ceremony and party are the next day but, reassured by his lawyer, he is released in time for both.
FBI agents are conferring about Tony Soprano . They have been listening to his phone calls for years without hearing anything incriminating, and the recordings made by Pussy Bonpensiero also reveal nothing. Using Pussy's file number, CW16, Agent Skip Lipari says that he is "probably compost"; Agent Frank Cubitoso removes Pussy's photograph from the wall and throws it away. Lipari reports that Tony goes to his basement to talk with his associates, believing the conversations will be masked by the noise of the central air conditioning units. They obtain legal authorization to plant a listening device there. Once a week the house is empty for long enough for the agents to examine the basement and later install the listening device. The first week they enter and find an old reading lamp in which a microphone could be hidden. They take pictures of it so they can replace it with a replica with a hidden listening device. In the second week, their plan is aborted when the house's water heater fails and the basement is flooded. In the third week, they successfully plant the replacement lamp and start listening. Meadow adjusts to life at Columbia University . Her volatile roommate, Caitlin , is having a hard time. Tony and the crew eat lunch in the back room of Satriale's . Patsy Parisi is not eating, mourning his identical twin Philly on their birthday. Patsy suspects that Tony had something to do with Philly's death. One afternoon, while the FBI watches Tony's house, they see a drunken Patsy on the pool patio aiming a gun at Tony through the window. Patsy can see Tony clearly in the house, but lowers the gun, turns around, and urinates in the pool. Tony does not see any of this. Some days later, Tony confronts Patsy when they are alone. He tells him that the past is past; he compels and cajoles him into declaring, twice, that he has put his grief behind him.
At home, Tony greets Meadow and her friend from college, Noah Tannenbaum . Tony and Noah talk briefly about Tony's favorite film The Public Enemy . Alone with him, Tony questions him about his ethnicity and confirms that he is half Jewish and half African-American . Tony tells him that, being black, he must stay away from his daughter. Noah swears at him and storms out. Tony goes to the kitchen; unwrapping some capocollo he sees a box of Uncle Ben's Rice , triggering a panic attack . Tony has read the newspaper headline: "2nd Firebomb in Sanitation War". He confronts Ralphie Cifaretto , an ambitious and effective member of Richie Aprile's crew, and Albert Barese about the sanitation dispute. He tells them firmly: "No more fires." So, instead, Ralphie has a man beaten up with baseball bats. Separately, Ray Curto meets his handler from the FBI ; he is 'cooperating'. Tony visits his mother Livia in an attempt to set things straight, and tell her what to say if questioned about the stolen airline tickets. She seems to stonewall him. Exasperated, he walks out. That evening, Livia dies from a stroke. Later, Tony tells Dr. Melfi , "I'm glad she's dead." Then he bursts out that he is "a bad son". Tony's sister Barbara informs him that Janice will not be coming for the funeral. He furiously calls her in Seattle and tells her to be on the next plane; she inveigles him into paying the fare. At the funeral home Janice insists that contrary to her wishes, Livia be given a lavish funeral and, exasperated, Tony agrees. In Livia's house, Janice hammers at the basement wall. At the funeral, still at the graveside, she has a dispute with Livia's caregiver Svetlana about Livia's collection of records. Svetlana says Livia gave them to her; Janice orders her to give them back. At the post-funeral reception at the Sopranos' house, Janice, against Tony's wishes, corrals everyone into the main room for a ceremony of remembrance. With some reluctance, one or two people speak in memory of Livia. Christopher , stoned on marijuana and cocaine , gives a rambling, unfocused speech. Tony slips outside, where he is confronted by an angry and drunk Artie Bucco , who remembers Livia telling him about Tony's torching of the Vesuvio . Artie goes back inside and seems ready to speak about it but Carmela , who has been drinking, suddenly says, "This is such a crock of shit." She says that Livia was "terribly dysfunctional" and "even from the grave...spread no cheer". Her father, Hugh, then says that Livia "estranged us from our own daughter" and "ruined I don't know how many goddamn Christmases." Carmela then upbraids Tony, Janice and Barbara for ignoring their mother's wishes and having an elaborate funeral. Artie ultimately remains silent. Afterward, Tony sits in front of the television with a drink and watches the scene from The Public Enemy in which the main character's mother joyfully prepares her home for her son's return, not knowing that he is dead. Tony gets teary.
Christopher Moltisanti is initiated as a made man alongside Eugene Pontecorvo in a ceremony conducted by Tony Soprano . During the ceremony, he sees (or imagines he sees) a raven perched outside the window and fears it is a bad omen. At the party afterward, Paulie gives Chris his sportsbook operation, although Chris will have to give him a portion of his weekly profits. Chris makes some bad judgments in his first week and comes up short. Paulie is unforgiving — he demands payment by the end of the week and imposes an extra payment for the delay. Jackie Aprile, Jr. has been taking pre-med courses at Rutgers University but is skipping classes and planning criminal activities. Tony asks him to meet, but Jackie shows up late and is disrespectful. Jackie's uncle Richie Aprile has disappeared — Jackie believes that Tony had Richie killed, and Tony knows this. Tony denies having anything to do with Richie's disappearance, saying that Richie was an informant who is now in the witness protection program .  Tony was close to Jackie's father, who did not want Jackie to follow a life of crime. Jackie says he was struggling in school and could never become a doctor. Later, Tony tells Chris not to involve Jackie in any criminal activities. Jackie has a plan to rob a charity concert at Rutgers. Chris needs money to pay off Paulie and agrees to help Jackie with the robbery. Chris takes over the operation and makes Jackie the getaway driver. While Jackie is waiting nervously in the car, he hears a gunshot and wets himself. Later Chris gives Paulie the money he owes. Paulie passes his own cut up to Tony, mentioning Jackie's involvement in the robbery. An angered Tony phones Chris, who ignores the call. Meadow is getting closer to Noah and continues to give Tony the silent treatment. A.J. joins the school football team, making his father very proud, especially when he recovers a fumble at a game. When AJ is made defensive captain and praised effusively, he passes out on the field. Svetlana claims she has the right to keep Livia's record collection; in response Janice steals her artificial leg. Svetlana tells Tony, who goes to the house to meet her. Irina is also there but he keeps his distance. He goes to the refrigerator and takes out some packets of sliced meat — then suddenly remembers: when he was around eleven, he saw his father chop off Mr. Satriale the butcher's pinkie for not paying a gambling debt. At dinner that night, his mother was excited by the fresh juicy joint of meat. The parents danced sensually together in front of the children; that was when Tony had his first panic attack. When he tells Dr. Melfi this, she sees a connection between meat, his parents' sexuality, and his panic attacks, saying "We've made real progress today."
Johnny Sack and his wife Ginny have moved to a large house in New Jersey. Tony goes there and asks Johnny insistently why he didn't tell him about it. Johnny says they moved there for family reasons and that he is not going to interfere in Tony's business. Two Russian thugs break into Janice's home and demand the return of Svetlana's prosthetic leg . When Janice refuses, one of them hits her hard. The leg is in a bowling alley locker; Janice takes them there and gives it to them. Tony visits her in the hospital, exasperated with her again; he will have to retaliate against the men who assaulted his sister. Janice says she has hit bottom but feels born again in the Lord: "I give myself up utterly and totally to God." Ralphie is now dating Rosalie , and takes Jackie, Jr. with him to collect extortion money. Ralphie has no dispute with the man there but provokes a fight. The man takes out a baseball bat, but Ralphie and Jackie take it from him. Ralphie holds the man and urges Jackie to hit him. Jackie eagerly beats and kicks him. Ralphie empties the man's wallet and gives some of the money to Jackie, who is gloating. Partly because of this incident, Tony makes Gigi a captain instead of Ralphie, to his deep disappointment. Dr. Melfi and her ex-husband Richard are now reconciled. Both he and Dr. Elliot Kupferberg are urging her to cease treating her gangster patient, whose name she inadvertently reveals to Kupferberg. She has her own doubts: "I've been charmed by a sociopath," she says. She believes it is now time for him to be treated by a behavior modification therapist, but Tony is reluctant to talk to anyone else. In the parking garage one evening after work, Dr. Melfi is attacked and raped. The police quickly find the man. Richard and her son Jason are enraged, especially when they are informed that, because of a loss in the chain of custody , the police had to release the rapist. Jennifer and Richard fight, blaming each other for the rape. Melfi later sees a picture of the man, named employee of the month at a local sub shop. She feels a crazed desire for revenge and knows she could obtain it with a word to Tony Soprano. She has a dream. She buys a soda from a vending machine with a piece of macaroni; when she reaches into the machine to get it, her hand is trapped inside. A Rottweiler appears and terrifies her. Then the rapist advances toward her. The dog turns and mauls the rapist, who cries in agony. With Kupferberg, she understands the meaning: the dog is Tony Soprano taking revenge on her behalf. She tells Tony and others she has been in a car accident. When he sees her, Tony is shocked and concerned by her injuries. He tells her he is now ready to see a behaviorist, but she says, "No," and starts crying. Tony goes to her, lays his hands gently on her, and asks what the matter is. She composes herself and asks him to return to his seat. He goes back, but asks, "What? You wanna say something?" After a tense pause, she says, "No."
Tony and Carmela have a joint session with Dr. Melfi . It ends in recriminations: Carmela feels the other two have joined against her. Driving home she is tearful; he drives recklessly and is pulled over for speeding by Officer Leon Wilmore, who is black. Tony's charm, his PBA card, and implicit bribery do not work, and Wilmore writes up a ticket. Tony contacts New Jersey Assemblyman Ronald Zellman to get it canceled. Days later, visiting a lawn ornament store, Tony sees Wilmore working there. He tells Tony, who is smiling sarcastically, that he has been transferred to the property room and can no longer work overtime. This is more drastic than Tony wanted and he asks Zellman to have him reinstated. Tony then has another argument with Meadow about his racist attitudes, and next time he speaks to Zellman he says Wilmore can stay where he is. But he returns to the garden store, makes a purchase, and offers him some additional $100 bills. Wilmore does not deign to take the money. Meadow takes the lamp from the basement at home to her dorm at Columbia University , and so unknowingly "neutralizes" the FBI's listening operation. Junior is diagnosed with stomach cancer . The last customers have left Nuovo Vesuvio and Artie is glad to be alone with Adriana to celebrate a profitable evening. She unexpectedly tells him that Christopher no longer wants her to work as a hostess and, hiding his chagrin, Artie allows her to leave without notice. When Tony and Chris are dining there, a drunken Artie needles Chris, who angrily makes a grab at him. Tony sends Chris out, then angrily grabs Artie himself. Artie says he is in love with Adriana and Tony's anger changes to amusement. He tells him never to utter those words again. Tony wants to go into business with Artie selling Italian food products. Charmaine nixes the idea, believing Tony only wants another business as a front . During the ensuing argument, she tells Artie that their marriage is over. Artie then has an awkward dinner with Adriana; she withdraws her hand when he tries to take it. Bryan Spatafore , Vito's brother, is innocently embroiled in a row between Mustang Sally and his girlfriend. Sally viciously assaults Bryan with a golf club, putting him into a coma. For this, Sally has to be killed. He goes into hiding, but is in touch with his godfather , Bobby Baccalieri's father, Bobby, Sr. ; the relationship is "in name only", Bobby, Sr. says, and he is assigned the job. But he is dying of lung cancer and can hardly stop coughing. Bobby desperately wants to stop his father from doing it; so does Junior, who goes to see Tony, who refuses to change the plan. Bobby, Sr. himself wants to do it: "It will feel good being useful for a change." The hit almost goes awry and ends with a struggle, but Bobby Sr. succeeds in killing Sally and his friend. After the killings, his face smeared with Sally's blood, he finds some cigarettes and starts smoking. Still smoking while driving away, he has a coughing fit, cannot reach his inhaler, and slumps onto the steering wheel. The car crashes and he dies.
Meadow and Noah are embracing on her bed in her room at Columbia when her unhappy roommate Caitlin comes back in. Meadow and Noah go to his room instead and they make love; it is her first time. They then try to help Caitlin; Meadow admires Noah's sensitivity. They take her out on her birthday, but an encounter with a deranged homeless woman upsets her again. When Meadow is away, Caitlin persuades Noah to let her hang out in his room. She distracts him while he is working and he is furious and ashamed at the grade he gets: "C-fucking-minus and it's all her fault!" Meadow nervously meets Noah's father; in reply to his question, she says her father is in waste management. She is taken aback when Noah tells her his father has taken out a restraining order against Caitlin. Then, when they are together studying in the library, Noah looks up and quietly tells Meadow he is breaking up with her, accusing her of being "too negative." At the Bada Bing , Tony is approached by one of the pole dancers, Tracee . She reminds him that he gave her advice about her sick son, and to thank him gives him some date nut bread she has made. Tony explains that this is out of place; also, she is Ralphie's girl. Tracee later approaches him again, telling him she is pregnant by Ralphie and asking for advice; Tony says that for the sake of future generations, she should abort Ralphie's child. Ralphie's manic jokes offend the other mobsters. He is obsessed with the film Gladiator , and roughhouses with Georgie . Things become tense when he finds a length of chain and swings it at Georgie, injuring his eye. Tracee misses work for three days, claiming to be sick, and stays at home with Ralphie. Silvio goes there, drags her out, and throws her into his car while Ralphie watches through a window, laughing. She later sees Ralphie at the club; he has not been in touch for three days and she insults him in front of the other mobsters. Out in the parking lot, Ralphie soothes her and she tells him she loves him. But he was being facetious, and they have a violent argument. She slaps him. He knocks her to the ground and bashes her head against a metal guardrail, killing her. Tony is furious and, although Ralphie is a made man , physically assaults him. He speaks obliquely about the event to Dr. Melfi . "Sad when they go so young," he says.
There is rising tension between Christopher and Paulie . As a newly made man, Chris is liable to be strip-searched. Paulie makes him strip in the back room of the Bada Bing and makes fun of his penis size. Late one night he and Patsy go to Chris's apartment and search his belongings. Chris sees Paulie sniffing Adriana's panties. Tony dismisses Chris's complaint. Paulie warns him never to complain about him again to the "big man". But then Paulie shows him a Big Mouth Billy Bass and they laugh together, friends again. Carmela runs into Angie Bonpensiero at a supermarket. Angie says that, though Tony is helping her financially, things are hard and she cannot afford an operation for her poodle . Carmela tells Tony, who goes to Angie's home and sees that she has a new Cadillac . He smashes its windows and lights with a baseball bat and tells her she should speak about money only to him. Junior has complete faith in his surgeon, Dr. John Kennedy . He does not know that Kennedy erred, removing too little of the tissue surrounding his tumor. When Kennedy says he would like to perform further surgery, Junior agrees, but Tony believes Junior is too much impressed by the doctor's name. They consult another doctor, who recommends that Junior receive chemotherapy treatments. A tumor board review is called, and they reach the same conclusion. Junior undergoes chemo and suffers distressing side effects. He longs to speak to Kennedy, who does not return his calls. Tony and Furio confront Kennedy on his golf course and bribe and intimidate him into giving Junior his attention. Kennedy appears at the hospital, warmly greets Junior, reassures him, and gives him his home phone number. Junior beams with happiness. Carmela has lunch with a dean from Columbia , Meadow's university. Tony refuses to go, saying that the purpose is to extort money. He will donate $5,000, no more. The dean tells her that his research indicates that the Sopranos could contribute $50,000. Carmela attends a session alone with Dr. Melfi on a day when Tony does not want to go. She stresses that she does not need therapy herself, but she makes an appointment with the therapist Melfi recommends. This therapist, Dr. Krakower, makes judgments. When he has learned about her situation, he speaks the word "Mafia" and tells her she should take the children and go, which he views as the only way to find peace. He will not accept payment for the session, stating that he does not want "blood money." Emotionally overwhelmed, Carmela lies on a sofa at home, wrapped in a blanket. When Tony returns, she tells him that she has spoken to the dean on the phone, and promised $50,000. He balks, but she says this is something he must do for her. He sees that he must.
Carmela and Rosalie notice the budding relationship between Meadow and Jackie Jr. ; Rosalie is thrilled. At a frat-house mixer, he gives her free Ecstasy . Later, they are together on her bed; doped and drunk, she falls asleep; he slightly lifts her clothes but goes no further. On a date, they make out in his car. Meadow warns Jackie that their relationship is unlikely to go anywhere at the moment. On another evening, an over-excited Meadow takes Jackie's car and wrecks it. She is unharmed, but he is deeply concerned and she asks to spend the night with him instead of being driven home. In Dr. Melfi's waiting room Tony finds another patient, Gloria Trillo , speaking on the phone. He hears that she works as a saleswoman at a Mercedes-Benz dealership. They have been double-booked and he gives her the appointment. Later, he visits the dealership and she accompanies him on a test drive. They end up in bed on Tony's boat. Gloria calls Melfi to cancel a session. Melfi hears a man's voice in the background. Ralphie is intentionally disrespectful to Tony when they meet. Each is thinking of killing the other. Johnny Sack passes messages between them, amending the messages to bring about a reconciliation. At Nuovo Vesuvio, Ralphie abjectly apologizes to Tony for all his past behavior, including his killing of Tracee , and blames his actions on his cocaine use. Tony barely acknowledges him. Johnny tells Ralphie that Tony was only "posturing." He has suggested to Tony that he could promote Ralphie to capo in place of Gigi , but Tony is reluctant. Gigi soon dies of a heart attack on the toilet; Ralphie is the best choice to succeed him. He is relieved and joyous when Tony tells him of the promotion. Then he asks whether he's being promoted on merit or just to replace Gigi. Tony does not answer. He walks away when Ralphie suggests they have a drink together.
A.J. and some friends break into their high school one night and go swimming. Some of them break into a teacher's office, throw supplies into the pool, and smash the trophy case. The police trace a custom pizza left at the scene to them. There is a conference between the school principal and the football coach, and Tony and Carmela with A.J. The Sopranos are surprised, and Carmela is angry, that A.J.'s punishment is going to be suspended because of his improved academic performance, and because it is in "his best interest – and the team's" for him to continue playing football. The principal says that any punishment should now be decided by the parents; they ground A.J. for a month with extra chores, such as cleaning the gutters. Carmela is delighted with the large sapphire ring Tony gives her for her birthday. She later asks, "Is there anything you need to tell me?" Tony is teased, provoked, thrilled, and fascinated by Gloria . At her request, he takes her to the zoo, and they have sex in the deserted reptile house. In a hotel room, undressing him, she is thrilled to find his gun. She says ironically, "Mr. Waste Management!" At her next session with Dr. Melfi she speaks of her happiness. Melfi asks about the man's voice she heard when Gloria last phoned her; Gloria seems offended and answers evasively. Melfi reminds Gloria that she attempted suicide when her last relationship failed. At Tony's next session he says that he had a very successful week and gives Melfi a bonus on top of his regular payment. She tries to refuse it, but he insists. She knows she is being lied to. Carmela has begun to approve of Jackie Jr. as a romantic partner for Meadow , as he is helpful around the house and bonds with A.J., mentoring him in football. In a heart-to-heart with Tony, Jackie promises that he will work hard. Later, Tony runs into him at an illegal casino and angrily rebukes him, saying emphatically, "If you're spending time with my daughter, I want the best from you." The Soprano family takes over a nightclub. Christopher tells Adriana that she will be the owner/manager. She renames it "Crazy Horse." On the club's opening night, Matush Giamona is caught dealing ecstasy in the bathroom and thrown out. Jackie tells Matush that he and Chris are associates. He asks Chris to let his friend Matush continue dealing inside the club; Chris dismisses him. Jackie then tells Matush that Chris permits him to deal outside the club. He does so and is badly beaten up by Furio and his men. At home, Jackie asks Ralphie for a " piece " and, without much questioning, Ralphie gives him a .38 revolver .
Tony is on the Asbury Park boardwalk, where he is going to meet Paulie . While waiting, he remembers another meeting there five years ago, in 1995, with Pussy and Jackie Aprile, Sr. At the time there was a dispute between Jackie and Junior , and Pussy had been in Boca Raton , Florida arranging a sitdown. However, Pussy did not go to the sitdown, and Tony thinks that was when the FBI flipped him; he believes they had him wear a wire when he dressed up as Santa. Now they need a new Santa and Bobby is compelled to play the part. He is shy, unhappy, and gauche. When Tony is visiting Janice she starts complaining about a pain in her wrist, which might need an operation, caused by the Russian thug who came to take back Svetlana's prosthetic leg . Tony obtains his name and place of work, and he and Furio beat him up and throw him through the glass window of a store's Christmas display. Though badly shaken at first when she sees on TV what Tony has done, Janice is also grateful, and immediately wants to write a song about brotherhood. Charmaine , newly separated from Artie , looks glamorous at Nuovo Vesuvio. Tony compliments her, but she responds by blaming him for changes in Artie's character. He angrily walks out, along with Christopher and Silvio . They go to a strip club. Jackie Jr. is there, getting a lap dance.  Enraged, Tony takes him to the bathroom and beats him up. He confiscates the gun Ralphie gave him, and knees him in the groin, leaving him on the floor. On Christmas morning, the Sopranos are opening their gifts when Jackie arrives with presents from his mother, and his own present for Meadow , an engraved necklace. She ostentatiously embraces and kisses him, while he glances at Tony. Alone with Tony, Jackie tells him he has flunked out of Rutgers but believes he can be a serious student of men's fashion. He says, "I'm sorry," again and again. Tony says, "I haven't decided what to do with you."  After Jackie leaves, Tony has to fake amusement when Meadow gives him her present, a Big Mouth Billy Bass .
Following a change in Jackie Jr.'s behavior, Meadow begins to suspect he is cheating on her. Her suspicions are confirmed when she catches him with another girl. Heartbroken, she tells him they are finished. Gloria and Tony's relationship is growing increasingly unstable and the two frequently argue, though they always reconcile. Tony tells Dr. Melfi that he is seeing Gloria. In the first session, he speaks of how happy they are together; in the second he complains of her changing moods. Melfi says Gloria is depressive , unstable, and impossible to please, asking Tony if that reminds him of anyone (implying his mother ). Tony shakes his head no. Tony instructs Paulie to make a collection from Valery , a Russian, on behalf of Silvio , who is ill. He goes with Christopher to Valery's apartment. Paulie provokes Valery and starts a fight. Following a struggle Paulie and Christopher manage to subdue Valery and believe they have killed him. Panicked, Paulie suggests that they dump him in the Pine Barrens . In the snow-covered woods, Paulie and Chris prepare to dump the body but find that Valery, who is revealed to be a trained commando , is still alive. They give him a shovel and instruct him to dig his own grave. While both are distracted, Valery hits them with the shovel and flees. They chase him, shooting wildly, with Paulie believing that he has hit him. They follow his track, but it ends: Valery has vanished. After wandering in the woods trying to find their car, Paulie and Chris realize they are lost. Long after nightfall, faint with cold and hunger, they find an abandoned van where they take refuge. They blame each other for what has happened and the two fight before agreeing to stay together. In the middle of the night, Paulie manages to call Tony despite poor cell service and pleads for help. Tony drives out with Bobby , an amateur outdoorsman . They reach the parking spot but Paulie's car, containing the money from Valery, has vanished. They wait until dawn to look for Paulie and Chris and eventually find them. Paulie gives a false version of what caused the fight with Valery, and Chris backs him up. Tony stresses to Paulie that if Valery ever turns up again, Paulie will have to take care of it. They head back to north Jersey in silence; only Bobby has peace of mind.
Carmela and Meadow are visiting the Brooklyn Museum when Carmela has to go to the restroom to use a tampon . She has some alarming symptoms and fears she has ovarian cancer or is pregnant. When she comes back, she is brought to tears upon seeing Jusepe de Ribera's painting The Holy Family with Saints Anne and Catherine of Alexandria . Watching something sentimental on television, she begins to cry and is unnerved when she realizes it is only a commercial for dog food. She takes confession with a priest who tells her to learn to live only on what the "good part" of her husband earns and to forgo the rest. On his advice, she sees an OB-GYN , who tells her she has a thyroid problem. Tony continues to see Gloria , even as her erratic behavior continues. Dr. Melfi uses the term "amour fou" (crazy love). Gloria happens to meet Carmela at the Mercedes dealership. She gives her a drive home, eliciting information from her. When Tony discovers this, he furiously breaks up with her. Gloria phones him, sobbing uncontrollably. He goes to her home and gently explains again that he is breaking up with her. She threatens to tell Carmela and Meadow about their affair. When Tony, enraged, starts strangling her, she urges him to kill her. He stops, and threatens her as he leaves. Later, he sends Patsy to repeat the warning: he goes for an ostensible test drive with her, pulls the car over on a deserted rural road, holds her at gunpoint, and tells her that if she ever contacts Tony or his family again, he will kill her. Jackie Jr. and his friends Carlo and Dino decide to rob Eugene's poker game, after Ralphie tells them how Tony and Jackie's father gained recognition for a similar heist. The dealer, Sunshine , keeps heckling the would-be robbers and is fatally shot by a panicking Jackie. In the ensuing firefight, Furio is shot in the thigh and Carlo is killed. Jackie and Dino find that their wheelman, Matush , has fled and left them at the mercy of Christopher and Albert . Jackie flees in a carjacked vehicle, abandoning Dino, who is shot dead. Christopher furiously expresses his desire to kill Jackie Jr. Tony forbids it. The next morning, Ralphie meets Tony to discuss how to deal with Jackie. Tony says Ralphie is responsible, but his advice is ambiguous. Ralphie is full of doubt: he blames Jackie Sr. for "spoiling" his son and wants to give Jackie a "pass". Tony gives Ralphie back the pistol he confiscated from Jackie. Ralph embraces Tony and leaves. Outside, he pauses, perplexed. At home, he tries to comfort Rosalie , who is distraught.
A.J. is expelled from high school for stealing answers to a test. Tony , enraged, decides to send him to military school . A.J. is interviewed by the administrator of the Hudson Military Institute, who explains the rigorous schedule for students. Carmela believes they will train him to be a "professional killer"; Tony counters that he will be learning discipline and respect. As A.J. prepares to leave home, he puts on his dress uniform; both parents sincerely admire his appearance, but he looks at himself in the mirror and, in tears, asks not to be sent away. As his mother is adjusting his uniform, he suffers a panic attack and collapses. Tony tells Dr. Melfi that his son has inherited his "putrid gene", and he cannot send him to military school. Seeking intelligence about the DiMeo crime family , the FBI decide to go through a woman and send Agent Deborah Ciccerone on an undercover mission to befriend Adriana . Danielle, as she calls herself, easily gets talking to Adriana in a dress shop. Paulie is in dispute with Ralphie about the division of proceeds from a robbery and insists on a sit-down. He claims $50,000; to his shock and dismay, Tony awards him only $12,000. Paulie later speaks quietly to Johnny about his dissatisfaction with Tony, and offers his services to Johnny's boss, Carmine Lupertazzi . Jackie Jr. is forced into hiding at a Boonton housing project after his failed robbery at Eugene's poker game. He calls Tony, pleading for help; Tony rebuffs him. Tony again expresses his confidence to Ralphie that, as captain, he knows what to do, but he must decide in a "timely fashion." Ralphie makes his decision. When Jackie leaves the apartment for a walk, he is shot in the back of the head by Vito . It is said that he was killed by drug dealers. At Jackie's visitation, Meadow cries uncontrollably when she sees him in his casket. Tony and Carmela are embarrassed when Rosalie notes the low attendance rate; the funeral has coincided with Super Bowl Sunday , a busy betting time. At the funeral, Silvio and Christopher are arrested for illegal gambling . During the reception at Rosalie's, Meadow and Kelli , Rosalie's daughter, argue bitterly about who killed Jackie. Despite the presence of a third person who is not a member of an organized-crime family, Kelli says emphatically that he was killed by an Italian. Loyal to her family, Meadow claims it was by a black drug-dealer. At the wake at Nuovo Vesuvio, Silvio and Chris enter, having quickly made bail . Ralphie has begun to distance himself from Rosalie; he and Janice ostentatiously embrace. Junior , no longer under house arrest, sings the Italian love song " Core 'ngrato ", moving some of the men to tears. Meadow, drunk, throws pieces of bread at Junior while he is singing, then quickly leaves when she sees that her father has noticed. He confronts her in the street; she tearfully denounces the funeral proceedings as "bullshit" and runs away. Tony returns and puts his arms round A.J. and Carmela as they listen to Junior sing.
Junior , worried about money, meets with Tony at his doctor's office, and asks for more help for his medical and legal expenses; Tony, however, has his own expenses and angrily tells him to manage his affairs better. Junior later promotes Bobby Baccalieri . Assemblyman Ron Zellman tells Tony that Junior owns a property in a special development district in Newark which is going to rise in value, and Tony buys the property, pretending that he is doing his uncle a favor. He also calls a meeting with the family's capos in which he criticizes the lack of growth in their businesses. Carmela begins to worry about money, having seen the widowed Angie Bonpensiero working at a supermarket. Tony insists that she and the children will be provided for if anything happens to him; he also claims he is no longer hiding money in their house, though he later hides packets of money in a tub of duck feed. Carmela happens to pass by just after he closes the tub. Paulie is arrested in Youngstown , Ohio , on a gun charge, and resents Tony's apparent indifference. In prison, he calls Johnny Sack , who cultivates his dissatisfaction. Ralphie and Janice are growing closer. Ralphie comes to a Sunday dinner at Tony and Carmela's home with Rosalie Aprile , but Janice later joins him in the bathroom for cocaine and sex. Christopher , believing that Tony is treating him harshly because he questioned his action against Jackie Aprile, Jr. , begins using heroin again. He complains about the constant presence of Adriana's close friend Danielle, unaware she is actually undercover FBI Agent Ciccerone . Adriana takes her to Tony's home and introduces her to him. Junior learns that there was an undercover agent in his doctor's office; he believes it was the nurse he was flirting with and is mortified that he failed to suspect her. Speaking to Dr. Melfi about business with unusual frankness, Tony discusses his plans to use Christopher as a proxy in order to avoid jail time or death. Although he knows that Christopher is taking heroin again, he now, in an attempt to bond with him, gives him the name and home address of a recently retired policeman who Tony claims killed his father. Christopher breaks into the man's house and kills him.
Meadow's recent lack of drive, caused by Jackie Jr.'s death, continues to worry Tony and Carmela . She reveals that she hasn't registered for classes because she hopes to travel to Europe with a friend. Tony discusses the problem with Dr. Melfi , who recommends a psychologist, Dr. Wendy Kobler , specializing in adolescents. Kobler encourages Meadow's plans, prompting a protracted family argument where Meadow confronts Tony about his profession; he claims that he did everything he could to save Jackie. She leaves the house and her parents fear she has left the country, but it is later revealed that she has instead returned to her classes at Columbia University . Carmela begins flirting with Furio as he makes his morning visits to pick up Tony. Ralphie and Janice's relationship continues, despite Tony's disapproval. Christopher is appointed acting capo of Paulie's crew; Patsy resents this, having been a made man longer than Christopher. Silvio suspects that Christopher is starting to usurp his place in Tony's inner circle. Christopher visits a construction site where crew members have no-work jobs , and he indicates to Patsy that there are valuable fiber optic cables which can be removed. Tony angrily reprimands Christopher for this, as the thefts might bring unwanted attention to their involvement. Later, despite Tony's orders, Silvio and Patsy steal floor tiles from the site. Jack Massarone complains to Tony, but Silvio deflects Tony's anger. An infuriated Christopher drives to the site and has a heated confrontation with Patsy. At a dinner party, Ralphie makes an off-color joke about Johnny's wife Ginny , drawing laughter from all. Visiting Paulie in prison, Little Paulie repeats the joke. Paulie does not laugh. Adriana now treats Danielle as her close friend and confidante. One evening at Adriana's club, Christopher, high on cocaine, is sitting on a sofa with the two women. As he kisses Adriana, he puts a hand on Danielle's thigh. Adriana is enraged, but when he claims Danielle took the initiative, Adriana chooses to believe him and cuts ties with Danielle. The FBI decides to bring Adriana in and reveal Danielle's true identity as Agent Ciccerone. She is taken to meet with Chief Frank Cubitoso who threatens her with imprisonment for drug possession , or punishment from Tony Soprano if she does not co-operate. Adriana vomits all over herself, the table, and the agents.
Silvio wants to take action against Native Americans protesting the Columbus Day parade , believing their actions to be insulting to Italian-Americans . When, without Tony's approval, he, Patsy , and Artie attempt to break up the protest, Little Paulie and several others are injured. Ralphie threatens the protest leader, Professor Del Redclay, that he will make it known that Iron Eyes Cody , a popular Native American figure, was actually an Italian-American. Tony unsuccessfully appeals to Assemblyman Ron Zellman and to an Indian chief to convince Redclay to cancel the protest. The chief invites Tony and his crew to his casino . Both the parade and protest occur without mob intervention, which upsets Silvio. Tony forcefully argues to Silvio that his achievements came through his own abilities, not through his heritage, and scorns the idea that everyone belongs to a victimized group. At a luncheon meant to instill Italian pride in women, the "mob wives" feel singled out when the speaker attempts to dissociate Italian culture from the Mafia. After the luncheon, Gabriella lectures Father Phil about how much the mob wives, especially Carmela , have given to the parish, and says he had no right to bring in a guest speaker who intended to shame them. The Soprano and Lupertazzi families meet over a meal: Johnny , speaking for Carmine , demands a share of the profit Tony made from Junior's warehouse, which was recently flipped . Tony agrees, but comes to the conclusion that someone from his organization is leaking information to the Lupertazzi family. Now that Johnny knows of Ralphie's joke about his wife, he is furiously hostile to him, but will not say why. Bobby's wife Karen is killed in a road accident. The mob wives feel sympathy for Bobby during the wake and discuss his having never taken a comare . Spending time with him in his home, Janice is touched by his sincere grief. Shortly after Ralphie leaves Rosalie , Janice allows him to move in with her; but after a discussion with her therapist, she wills herself to break up with him. When he comes home with his baggage, she yells at him to leave and pushes him down the stairs, injuring his back. Janice locks herself in her room as Ralphie hobbles back to his car, bags in hand.
Johnny is consumed with anger about Ralphie's joke about Ginny , leading him to savagely assault a member of Ralphie's crew who he encounters at a bar. When Tony confronts him, he blames his temper, but also says he loves his "Rubenesque" wife. On Tony's instructions, Ralphie phones Johnny to try to make peace, but he ends up giving a botched apology; Johnny takes this as an admission of guilt and is further angered. Johnny asks Carmine to permit a hit on Ralphie; he refuses. There are two sit-downs. Johnny walks out of the first because Ralphie is present. At the second, Ralphie is not present, but Johnny remains inflexible and insists on retaliation to defend his wife's honor. Carmine turns him down again and tells him to "get the fuck over it." Johnny walks out again. Carmine hints to Tony that Johnny can be killed, and Silvio and Christopher arrange for it to be done in Boston, where Johnny will be visiting his father. Simultaneously, Johnny arranges for Ralphie to be killed in Miami, where he is staying in a hotel. Johnny leaves New Jersey for Boston but returns home to retrieve a sweater. He finds Ginny with a stash of junk food and candy. Initially angry, he reminds her that he never asked her to lose weight but is deeply hurt that she has lied to him. He calls off the hit at the last moment and tells Tony he will accept Ralphie's apology. Meadow joins a legal aid organization representing underprivileged clients in the South Bronx . Tony is not pleased that she is drifting away from her plan to be a pediatrician . Carmela and Tony argue bitterly about their finances. She and Furio , who comes each morning to pick Tony up, are growing closer. He has bought a house and she goes to see it with A.J. At the housewarming party, Carmela and Furio dance together to sensual Italian music. Tony buys Carmela some flowers and a little black dress from Saks Fifth Avenue . She puts it on. Greatly aroused, he takes her to bed. As he lies heavily on top of her, her eyes open and she imagines that she hears the music to which she and Furio danced.
Adriana realizes that her club is not entirely hers, as the back rooms are freely used by Tony and his crew for business. Her FBI handlers, including her new contact Robyn Sanseverino , are pressing her for information. They tell her that Christopher is associating with dangerous criminals, and she can help him; they also cause her to doubt that Richie and Pussy are in witness protection . She gives away a little information about Patsy . At home, she relieves stress with heroin . Janice is insinuating herself into Bobby's family life: she freezes out Mikey Palmice's widow JoJo , and serves the family Carmela's delicious lasagna , claiming it as her own. She urges Bobby to get over his grief as he might lose Junior's support. Bobby pulls himself together and completes a neglected task for Junior: meeting with a union shop steward to intimidate him into changing his vote in an upcoming election. Tony and Carmela are still bitterly divided about their investments. He refuses to sign the life insurance trust she proposes, having been advised it is too much in her favor. She receives a stock tip, but when he comes up with the money, it is too late. Ralphie's racehorse , Pie-O-My, wins and he happily shares the winnings with Tony, who demands a bigger share for the next race, to Ralphie's chagrin. Veterinarian's fees pile up, and one night when Pie-O-My is very sick, the vet refuses further treatment unless he is paid. Ralphie refuses and passes along Tony's number, and he rushes to the stables and pays. He then goes into the stall and sits with Pie-O-My, gently petting and reassuring her.
Carmela tells Tony "that nice sales-lady" Gloria Trillo (his mistress) has committed suicide. Tony goes to the car showroom to find out more, then furiously confronts Dr. Melfi , who explains that he should not blame her, or himself, for her death. Plagued by guilt, Tony seeks ways to prove he is a good person and performs some generous acts for his friends and family. He signs a living trust for Carmela, in place of the one he refused to sign before. He then arranges for Brian Cammarata to be provided with discounted suits, then takes Janice out for a companionable dinner. He continues his good deeds with another dinner where Furio is introduced to a blind date arranged by Carmela. She smiles uneasily, seeing them get on well. A.J.'s friends are curious about his family's lifestyle and drive him around town to try to find out his father's actual line of work. In the lavish home of his girlfriend Devin Pillsbury , A.J. is intimidated by her family's wealth. When his friends ask why his family does not have " Don Corleone money", he has no answer. One evening, high on heroin, Christopher receives a call from Tony instructing him to meet in twenty minutes. Tony says that to limit his own exposure, he will be giving more of his orders through Christopher, who will help "take the family into the 21st century." Christopher feels deeply honored, but continues to take heroin . Artie has a new French hostess at Nuovo Vesuvio, Élodie, who he flirts with. Her brother, Jean Philippe, asks for a $50,000 bridge loan to conclude a deal to distribute Armagnac in the United States. Artie agrees to lend him the money at 13 percent interest. He tries to borrow the money from Ralphie , who declines but mentions it to Tony. Tony meets Artie, reminds him of their friendship, and insists that he accept the loan from him at only one-and-a-half percent interest. Ten days pass and Jean-Philippe is not answering his phone. Artie confronts him at his home. Jean-Philippe reveals that the deal has failed and he does not have the money. Artie attacks him, but Jean-Philippe gains the upper hand, rips out his earring and throws him out. At home, Artie overdoses on alcohol and pills and calls Tony to apologize. Tony deduces that he is trying to kill himself and calls 911. At the hospital, Tony says that Artie can clear his tab at Nuovo Vesuvio in lieu of payment. Artie expresses admiration that Tony could foresee that the deal would go bad and that he would be able to profit from it; this observation infuriates Tony. Furio is sent by Tony to Jean-Philippe's apartment to collect the debt.
Adriana gets the idea from a TV crime drama that spouses cannot be forced to testify against each other, so she surprises Christopher by proposing that, after two years' engagement, they should get married. But when she confesses that she might not be able to have children, he storms out. Tony and Silvio urge him to marry her regardless. Fortified by heroin , Christopher apologizes for his outburst and tells her he will marry her. But she learns from a lawyer that the TV drama was wrong: in a major trial, she can be made to testify. At her bridal shower , she cheerlessly unwraps her presents. Furio Giunta invents a pretext to phone Carmela and tells her he has a pretty picture of her from the house-warming, but next morning he declines to enter the house, saying there is a problem in the car. Brian Cammarata casually mentions a bogus housing deal he knows about, but Tony and Ralphie take it seriously and carry out their own scheme to defraud the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development . They make use of Dr. Ira Fried , Assemblyman Ronald Zellman , and Maurice Tiffen , a black activist. Some derelict houses are purchased. Tony takes A.J. for a drive, showing him the houses to illustrate his family's proud history of dedication to work. One of the houses is occupied by black squatters who have turned it into a crack den. Tony puts pressure on Zellman to evict them: Zellman puts pressure on Tiffen; Tiffen demurs at the use of violence, but four armed teens are sent and the squatters are violently evicted. Based on false appraisals, a large loan is obtained from HUD. Fried, Zellman, and Tiffen get their cuts; Tony presents Brian with a Patek Philippe watch. Zellman and Tiffen recall that they were idealists together in the '60s and briefly lament the corruption of their ideals. Paulie is released from prison. There is a big welcome-back party and an envelope of cash from Tony. But Paulie is still resentful that Tony never contacted him when he was in prison, and speaks of this to Johnny Sack . He tells him that Tony has a new property scam. Johnny confirms that their conversations are secret, and tells Paulie that Carmine Lupertazzi thinks very highly of him. Zellman diffidently informs Tony that he is having a serious relationship with his ex-mistress Irina . Tony does not seem to mind. One day he finds a pretext to go to Zellman's house and sees Irina again. One night, drunk and overcome by emotion, he drives to the house and barges up to the bedroom where he finds Zellman half-undressed. Tony takes off his belt and lashes him with it, saying, "All the girls in New Jersey, you had to fuck this one?"
Paulie's mother Nucci moves into a retirement home and is looking forward to being with old friends, including Cookie Cirillo . But Cookie has her own group and Nucci is ostracized. Paulie visits Cookie's son, Chuckie, who he used to know at school; he is now a school principal. He presents him with a suitcase and firmly asks him to persuade his mother to be more friendly. Nothing changes. Chuckie is then visited by Benny and Little Paulie who chase him through the school and break his right arm. Chuckie's wife threatens to take Cookie out of the nursing home if she does not make peace with Nucci. Carmela is thinking about Furio who is back in Naples , where his father has died. He confides to his uncle that he is in love with the boss's wife. His uncle tells him that the only way to have her is to kill the man. Furio says he knows. Tony starts giving directions to his underlings through payphone calls to Christopher , but he is bored and keeps micro-managing. At the stables, he meets Ralphie's new girlfriend, the Cuban - Italian Valentina La Paz . She works in a picture-framing company and arranges for Tony to commission a portrait of himself with Pie-O-My. They start an affair. She wants to keep seeing him but Tony will not share her with Ralphie. To persuade him, she tells him that Ralphie is only interested in masochistic fantasies and never has (as Tony puts it to Dr. Melfi ) "penissary contact with her volvo." But he continues to rebuff her until she breaks up with Ralphie, and her claims about his fetishes are confirmed (in return for payment) by Janice. Carmela is infuriated when she discovers a false fingernail —belonging to Valentina—in Tony's clothes. She takes two packets, totaling $50,000, of the money Tony has hidden in the duckfeed, and invests it with stockbrokers . She ensures that Tony finds the fingernail, and realizes what she has done. At breakfast, while she makes coffee, they ask each other if they have anything to talk about, and both say no. Silence ensues.
Junior is hospitalized with a concussion after a boom mic sends him falling down the courthouse steps. He soon recovers and enjoys his hospital stay as a respite from the RICO trial. Tony recognizes this as a potential advantage and convinces Junior to feign dementia during his competency hearings. He gives a good performance but begins exhibiting actual signs of dementia in private. Ralphie's 12-year-old son Justin is hit in the chest with an arrow while play-acting The Lord of the Rings with a friend, resulting in significant blood loss and brain damage. While delivering some cash to Tony, Ralphie cries openly. Expressing a desire for some kind of redemption, he meets with Father Phil and establishes a scholarship at Rutgers in Jackie Jr.'s name. Everyone sympathizes with him except Paulie . His mother recently received a traumatic prank phone call, and Paulie correctly suspects that it was from Ralphie, retaliating against him for ratting him out to Johnny . At the stables, a fire breaks out, apparently caused by faulty electrical wiring. Pie-O-My is badly burned and has to be euthanized. Tony is devastated and immediately suspects Ralphie, later confronting him at his home over the suspicious timing of the fire: the $200,000 insurance pay-out would cover Justin's medical bills. Ralphie vehemently denies the accusation, but their argument escalates into a physical fight, culminating in Tony strangling Ralphie to death. Tony calls Christopher for help; he arrives late and high on heroin . Tony never outright admits to Christopher that he killed Ralphie, and Christopher never expresses outright suspicion. Together, they dismember Ralphie's body in his bathtub with a meat cleaver, and meticulously clean the place before leaving. They bury his severed head, toupee, and hands on a farm; they throw the rest of his body off a cliff into the water below, and into a flooded quarry. After the disposal, they clean up at the Bada Bing , where Tony passes out and wakes up alone the following morning.
A week after Ralphie's "disappearance", there is still no word of him. At a dinner with Silvio and Patsy , Albert voices the crew's suspicions that Tony killed Ralphie because of a horse. At a meeting, Johnny demands that Tony let New York in on the HUD scam. When Tony refuses, Johnny threatens him. Tony calls a meeting of key family members and asserts that Johnny had Ralphie killed over the HUD scam. He stresses that no action should be taken until they have proof. At a session with Dr. Melfi , Tony tearfully expresses his pain over losing Pie-O-My . Melfi comments that he seems to grieve more for animals than for humans. The portrait of him and the horse is delivered to the Bada Bing ; Tony angrily orders it destroyed. But when Paulie sees Benny and Little Paulie trying to burn the painting he rescues it, over-valuing it and saying it would be an honor to have it in his house. He hangs it in his living room but later takes it down to have it modified to garb Tony in a " Napoleon -like" uniform. Paulie hangs it up again and sits with his back to it while watching television, but Tony's eyes are still on him. Furio returns with gifts for A.J. and Meadow but, to her disappointment, nothing for Carmela . He still declines to enter the house with her. Carmela again finds a pretext to visit him at his home, again taking her unwilling chaperone A.J., who is beginning to understand the situation. Carmela confides in Rosalie , who urges her not to go any further with Furio; they both know what Tony would do if he found out. Tony admires Svetlana , who has established her own nurses' agency, which supplies the nurse assigned to Junior . When the nurse is ill, Svetlana takes her place. Tony goes to the house one afternoon when he knows Junior is napping. They have sex on Junior's couch. Afterward, Tony is put out when she suggests they not see each other again. The regular nurse returns unexpectedly and can tell what has been going on. Adriana breaks down in tears when she finds that Christopher , in a heroin -induced stupor , sat on her dog and killed it. Her FBI handler, Agent Sanseverino , says Adriana should urge him to go into rehab , and she has arranged for material to be sent to their home. Chris is carjacked , robbed, and beaten up while attempting to purchase heroin in a low-income barrio . When he returns home, Adriana gives him a pamphlet for a rehab clinic. He is infuriated and hits her. Badly bruised, Adriana goes to Carmela. Junior advises Tony to kill Chris, but he refuses. Instead, family and friends organize an intervention . It soon degenerates as Chris is irate with everybody in the room. Tony is enraged when he hears that Chris killed Adriana's dog. Chris verbally attacks those trying to help him and insults his own mother . Silvio and Paulie turn on him and beat him up, resulting in him being taken to the emergency room with a hairline skull fracture . Tony arranges for him to go to a rehab clinic in Pennsylvania and demands that he not leave until he is clean, telling him that Patsy will be watching him. Chris begins to
express remorse for his actions.
Tony dreams: He is riding in the back of his father's old Cadillac , which is being driven by Carmela with Ralphie beside her. There is a caterpillar on Ralphie's bald head, then a butterfly. Tony at first sees Gloria sitting next to himself, then Svetlana . Tony discusses the dream with Dr. Melfi , who suggests that it signifies that Carmela is in control and Tony wants to square the changes in the lives of the others in the car with her. But Tony is growing dissatisfied with his therapy and rejects her interpretation. In the next session, he admits that Svetlana broke up with him because she thinks he is "high-maintenance," and too hard to cope with emotionally. This is after four years of therapy. Although Melfi tells him that he needs to continue, he states that it is over. She offers to shake hands; he kisses her on the cheek and leaves. Sophia notices a cake in her father Bobby's car. When Janice asks him about it later, he tells her that he goes to Karen's grave every day, and he buried the cake on what would have been their anniversary. Janice says she understands his grief. Sophia and Bobby Jr. wonder about their mother's ghost. After a Sunday dinner at the Soprano home, Carmela demands that A.J. play a game with the two children. He takes out a Ouija board and engages in a mock séance that terrifies them. When the children are back at home, Janice uses an internet chat program to direct them to their own Ouija board. When Bobby arrives home, his children are in a terrified state and he calls Janice for help. She tells him she had heard them using the Ouija board earlier in the day, but thought it would be improper to intervene. She uses the manufactured situation to encourage Bobby to move on and convinces him to eat his wife's last frozen baked ziti . Junior starts to exhibit more symptoms of Dementia . However, at his trial the judge denies Melvoin's motion to dismiss on the grounds of mental incompetence. Bobby reassures Junior that they will get to a juror. Tony has a sitdown in New York City with Carmine and Johnny , who demand 40% of the profits of his HUD scam. Tony walks out but phones with a counter-offer of 5.5%, which Carmine rejects. On Carmine's orders, Joey Peeps and an associate beat up "Vic the Appraiser," who works for Tony, and tell him to start working for Carmine. Vic later gets beaten up again, this time by Vito and an associate, to convince him to work for the Soprano family. Alone with Silvio, Tony raises the possibility of reaching out to Carmine's son, Little Carmine , in Florida through their old friend Beansie Gaeta . He voices his suspicion to Silvio that Paulie is leaking information to Johnny, and they agree not to tell him about the trip. In fact, Johnny is still treating Paulie as if they are confidants, hinting that there might be a change of leadership in New Jersey . "Carmine won't forget you," he says. In Miami , Tony meets with Little Carmine, who agrees to travel home and talk to his father. Tony threatens action against New York should negotiations fail to yield results. That night, Tony dreams: He follows Ralphie to an old house. Ralphie disappears; Tony then sees himself as an Italian-American immigrant, coming for a masonry job at the house. Before he enters, he sees a female figure with a shadowy face resembling his mother walking downstairs. He enters — and wakes up short of breath, sweaty, and startled. He goes out to the balcony, into the bright Miami sun, and stares at the ocean.
At Junior's trial, Bobby carefully chooses a juror who wears a wedding ring. Eugene and Dogsy intimidate him with carefully chosen words. Little Carmine returns to New Jersey to talk to Carmine and Johnny about reducing their claim on Tony for a share of the HUD scam. Carmine will not bend. Johnny later meets Tony and Silvio and offers a minor compromise; Tony rejects it and orders Little Paulie , who takes two others with him, to vandalize Carmine's new restaurant. Carmine uses his union influence to shut down work at the warehouse project. Tony decides to wait the dispute out, expecting the financial losses on both sides will quickly force Carmine into a compromise. Johnny and Tony meet in secret; Johnny says Carmine's decisions lighten his pockets and, to Tony's astonishment, obliquely suggests that they collaborate to kill him. Paulie has an angry confrontation with Silvio, who tells him his earnings are low and Tony is beginning to doubt his loyalty. He runs into Carmine and greets him effusively; he is shocked as he realizes that Carmine has no idea who he is. He learns that his mother's friend Minn keeps all her savings under her mattress. He breaks into her house thinking she is out, but she stumbles upon him in her bedroom, and he suffocates her with a pillow. He goes to Tony and gives him a large envelope of cash. They smile at each other, on good terms again. Carmela visits Furio's house, alone, to discuss decorating; it seems they are going to kiss, but they are interrupted by one of her father's contractors. They make a "date" to choose the tiles of the house together. With Tony and other members of the crew, Furio visits an Indian casino in Connecticut . While most of the others carouse, he stands aloof. Later, as the drunken crew prepare to board the casino's helicopter for the flight home, Furio grabs Tony and appears barely able to restrain himself from shoving him into the spinning tail rotor . He tells the baffled Tony he was standing too close to the blades. The next morning, he does not come to collect Tony: he has abruptly relocated back to Italy. Tony, who cannot clearly remember what happened the previous evening, complains that he has lost one of his key men. Carmela becomes unhappy and bad-tempered. A family dinner to meet Meadow's new boyfriend, Finn DeTrolio , dispirits her. She is shocked by the notion that there are homosexual themes in Billy Budd , the book A.J. is studying, and argues about it with Meadow and her roommates. The antagonism spills over into their next meeting, a mother-daughter birthday meal at the Plaza Hotel . A.J. tells Meadow about their mother's visits to Furio; he does not understand what they imply, but she does. Tony admits to Meadow that he was previously seeing a psychiatrist, and explains the possible source of her mother's tension before warmly sending her off on her vacation. Later, Tony asks Carmela if seeing Meadow mature into an independent woman is not all she ever wanted. She stares at a wall and answers in an emotionless tone of voice, "Yes."
With the Esplanade project shut down, Johnny is worried about his lost revenue. Tony declines to move against Carmine , but when Johnny offers generous concessions, he relents. Christopher returns from rehab in better shape and with a positive attitude. Tony asks him to deal with Carmine and make it look like "an outside job"; Christopher pays two heroin dealers and delivers instructions for the hit. However, Carmine unexpectedly changes his mind and offers to negotiate. He agrees to accept just 15% while praising Little Carmine for his role in the negotiations. Though Johnny still intends to go through with the hit, Tony decides against it and orders Christopher to silence — kill — the hired guns. When Tony and Johnny meet again, Johnny expresses his resentment and anger at Tony for backing out of their agreement. Tony says he still considers him a friend. They embrace without warmth. Thanks to juror intimidation, Junior is freed following a mistrial . As Bobby and Janice celebrate, Junior, distrusting Janice, finds a pretext to stop them. Adriana is once again questioned by federal agents after Christopher returns from rehab. She passes on false information about Ralphie which she has heard from Christopher. Tony takes Carmela on a surprise trip to "Whitecaps," a house on the Jersey Shore he is thinking of buying. At first hesitant, Carmela is eventually delighted; she and Tony walk on the beach and kiss. Tony meets the house's owner, Alan Sapinsly, an attorney, and offers cash in the shortest possible time allowed by law. Sapinsly calls the current buyer, who is having difficulty obtaining a mortgage , and threatens and negotiates his way out of their contract. Irina drunk dials Carmela, brags about Tony's relations with her, and tells her he also had sex with Svetlana . This causes Carmela extreme distress and when Tony returns home she is hurling his possessions from an upstairs window. She tells Tony that he has embarrassed her for years with his infidelity and tells him to leave the house, while Tony retorts that she stole the cash he had hidden in the birdseed. He goes to Irina's home and finds Svetlana, who explains that soon after Tony humiliated Zellman in front of Irina, their relationship ended. Tony spends the night at Whitecaps and explains to Sapinsly that he no longer wishes to buy the house, but Sapinsly declines to release him from the contract. Meadow argues with her mother about the separation, asking her how she could "eat shit" from Tony for so many years. Tony returns home and becomes violent when Carmela tells him to leave; she threatens to call a lawyer and get a restraining order . A.J. helps Tony clear the home theater, so that he can stay there. As Tony lies in the pool, Carmela confronts him about a minor annoyance, leading to another argument where she finally reveals her feelings for Furio . Tony, at first incredulous, again becomes violent and almost hits her, but stops himself and strikes the wall beside her head instead. He tells her he looked for women with different qualities from her; she retorts that he hardly knew most of the women he slept with. Tony calls Dr. Melfi , but hangs up when she answers. She tries to call him back but his number is blocked. He finally tells the family he has decided to move out completely. He embraces his children. Meadow cries in her bedroom. Sapinsly calls Tony and tells him that he will release him from the sale but will keep the $200,000 deposit. He offers to negotiate, but Tony declines. Benny and Little Paulie take the speakers out of Tony's home theater, install them on Tony's boat, anchor it just offshore from Sapinsly’s house and, at lunchtime, play music very loud. The Sapinslys try to ignore it. At night, as they sit peacefully on the patio, the music starts again.
Janice and Bobby Baccalieri are now married. A year after his separation , Tony is living in his mother's former home. One evening, while A.J. is in the backyard, a large black bear appears. Terrified, he calls for his mother , who drives off the bear and calls the authorities. Tony visits the next day and talks to Carmela, but the discussion turns hostile when she criticizes him for buying A.J. too many gifts. As they argue about money, she accuses him of calling Italy on his cellphone, and he tells her that Furio's life is “finished” if certain people find him. Tony tasks Benny and Little Paulie to guard his backyard, and Carmela reluctantly supplies them with a rifle. After watching The Prince of Tides with his mistress, Valentina , Tony feels driven to see Dr. Melfi again, and he sends flowers and a greeting card to her office. When he calls her to set up a date, she declines, feeling that it would be unprofessional to date a former patient. She has a sexual dream about him. Tony then schedules an appointment, an opportunity to tell her he loves her. He forcibly kisses her; she tactfully makes him desist. In a therapy session with her own psychiatrist , she admits her initial attraction to Tony. Tony makes a third attempt to court her by offering cruise tickets, but she declines again. At his request, she tells him the aspects of his character she could not accept; but there are things he cannot bear to hear, and he storms out. He returns home, in a sense, and takes over guard duty from Benny. Four mobsters imprisoned in the 1980s are released on parole . Three of them are a generation older than Tony: Soprano family capo Michele "Feech" La Manna , Lupertazzi family consigliere Angelo Garepe , and Lupertazzi capo Phil Leotardo . The fourth is Tony's cousin, Tony "Tony B" Blundetto . Feech wishes to return to work as a shy and sports bettor, which Tony and Uncle Junior permit so long as he does not compete with other operators. Tony is excited about his cousin's release and plans a lavish welcome party. Carmine Lupertazzi has a stroke and is hospitalized. At the hospital, Johnny Sack tells Tony that he is still angry that he backed out of their agreement to kill Carmine the previous year. Christopher and Paulie confront each other when their re-telling of their Pine Barrens ordeal devolves into mutual recriminations. Christopher begins to resent the custom that, being of lower rank, he is expected to pay when they dine in a restaurant. One evening, he forces Paulie to pay, but Paulie demands that Christopher repay him the next day and threatens that interest will be added if he does not. When he complains to Tony, he tells Christopher to keep paying the tabs, as he himself once did. In Atlantic City , Paulie contrives to inflate their dinner bill to nearly $1,200. As they argue in the parking lot, their waiter confronts Christopher about his poor tip , and when they dismiss him, he insults them. An enraged Christopher throws a brick at his head. The waiter collapses and has a seizure , causing a panicked Paulie to shoot him dead. Paulie takes the $1,200 as he and Christopher speed off in their cars. The next day, they make amends and split the original tab.
After Carmine dies, Little Carmine believes he is his father's successor, a claim dismissed by Johnny . Tony has a meeting with Jack Massarone , who presents him with a painting of the Rat Pack . Tony has known Massarone a long time, but does not know that he is now an FBI informant ; the tip comes from a source of Patsy ’s. Tony arranges another meeting and hugs Massarone, trying to find the wire , which is hidden in his baseball cap. He does not know what to think but realizes that Massarone said one thing out of key: he complimented Tony on losing weight. Tony spends a restless night, then drives to the Pulaski Skyway and tosses Massarone's painting into the river below. Massarone is found dead in the trunk of his car the next day. Another informant, Soprano capo Ray Curto , visits FBI Headquarters to help agents correct a transcript of a meeting he recorded. A third informant, Adriana , is under pressure, immensely uncomfortable leaking information from Christopher and Tony. Her handler, Agent Sanseverino , tells her about the family tragedy that compelled her to join the Bureau and says they are "with the good guys now", but Adriana is not comforted. At an evening with Carmela and other wives, Adriana is racked with guilt, which is inflamed when Rosalie tells her that Big Pussy Bonpensiero's widow, Angie , is not welcome in their group because her husband was an informant. A tearful Adriana nearly admits the truth, but instead flees, and stumbles and hurts herself in the driveway. She refuses the women's offers of first aid and speeds away in her car. She then tells Sanseverino that her friend Tina, who has been flirting with Christopher , is embezzling money from the company where she works. Tony greets Tony B after he is released from prison. At his welcome-home party at Nuovo Vesuvio, Tony tells the guests how important his cousin was in his life growing up. Tony B is disappointed that his ex-wife and twin sons are not there. There is some awkwardness when he seems to mock Tony's weight gain. Tony offers his cousin a place in a stolen airbag operation, but Tony B is not eager to get back in the business and seeks to go legitimate by becoming a state-licensed massage therapist . A disappointed Tony tells Christopher and Silvio that his cousin is "useless." He rebukes Tony B for making jokes about him, as he is now "the boss," and for giving massages in the office. However, in a late-night phone call, he seems to soften his tone and they reconcile.
Sal Vitro, a gardener who has been working in a particular neighborhood for decades, is told by Feech that the neighborhood now belongs to his nephew, E. Gary La Manna . When Sal rebuffs him, Feech viciously attacks him and breaks his right arm before Tony B , who is with him, pulls him away, reminding him that he is on parole . Paulie learns about the assault and tells Sal that, for a few percentage points, he can put things right. Paulie visits Feech at his bakery, his legitimate business, but Feech angrily tells him to get out. Paulie then finds Gary and his brother at work, assaults them both, then empties Gary's wallet; he orders Gary to give him a cut of his profits and to pay Sal's medical bills. In a sit-down, Tony rules that the neighborhood should be divided between Gary and Sal. When Paulie informs Sal, he tries to hide his disappointment. Paulie adds that he will have to provide free services at the homes of "some friends of ours," including Tony and Johnny , whose lawn is huge. Tensions rise in New York as loan shark Lorraine Calluzzo and her boyfriend, Jason Evanina, collect debts and pass payments up to Little Carmine . They are attacked by three of Johnny's men: Phil Leotardo , his brother Billy , and Joey Peeps . Phil subjects Lorraine to a mock execution . She, Jason, and Angelo have a meeting with Tony and Junior . Tony recommends that the Lupertazzi family form a triumvirate composed of Johnny, Carmine, and Angelo. Angelo says he is semi-retired and just wants to enjoy his grandchildren. Tony meets Johnny, telling him that Lorraine reached out to him. He raises the power-sharing idea from the previous meeting, framing it as Angelo’s idea. Johnny responds with contempt, accusing Tony of empowering Carmine during the dispute over the HUD scam. During a later sit-down with Johnny, Tony is accompanied by Christopher , who, despite Tony's instructions, intervenes. Johnny angrily shouts at them and the sit-down fails. Tony mends fences with Artie Bucco , who is still holding a grudge over the loan incident. He offers Artie one of the bedrooms in his mother's house since Artie has run into problems with his living arrangements; after some hesitation, he accepts. Junior's dementia is gradually worsening. One afternoon, he wanders out in a bathrobe and slippers and drives to Bloomfield Avenue where his brother, Johnny Boy , once had a family hangout. It is now a storefront church and he is kicked out. Befuddled, Junior forgets where his car is parked and walks aimlessly. At night, two Newark policemen discover him and drive him home. Janice and Bobby discuss his condition with Tony. There is an argument: Janice slaps Tony and he starts choking her. As Bobby and Artie try to break up the fight, Artie gets hit in the eye by Janice's elbow. Janice runs out of the house crying. Junior's neurologist explains to Tony that his insults and erratic behavior may have been due to his infarcts (mini-strokes). Tony visits Junior and asks why he never says anything nice. "Don't you love me?" he asks. Junior doesn't answer, and they both quietly tear up.
In New York , Lorraine and Jason are murdered by Joey Peeps and Billy Leotardo after they refuse to give their collections to Johnny . Little Carmine is advised by fellow capo Rusty Millio to take aggressive action. Tony advises his capos and soldiers not to get involved in the New York feud. Feech comes in to see Tony and regales the younger mobsters with stories from his mob career, including one when Tony and Jackie Aprile, Sr established themselves by robbing his card game. Tony laughs at this, but Feech asks if he can run the game once again. Tony allows him to supervise it and get 20% of its profits. At the card game, Feech's jokes and anecdotes annoy Tony but generate uproarious laughter from his crew. In an argument, Carmela has told Tony he has no friends, just "flunkies" who laugh at his jokes because he is the boss . As a test, Tony makes a feeble joke to see if the card players laugh; and they do. Feech's hired men carjack the guests at the wedding of the daughter of Tony's close friend, Ira Fried, and sell the vehicles to Johnny's men. Tony then recalls the joke he told at the card game and realizes the only person not laughing was Feech. He reluctantly decides that Feech, although well-liked and respected, has to be dealt with. Tony sends Christopher and Benny to Feech's house, where they trick him into hiding a truckload of flatscreen TVs in his garage in return for payment, plus a TV for himself. The following day, a parole officer visits Feech and asks about the flatscreen in his living room, then asks to see his garage; Feech has to comply. On the bus back to prison, he gazes at the outside world. Jennifer Melfi finds that Tony has left a basket of expensive toiletries and a bathrobe in her waiting room. Later, stressing the misspelled words, she reads the gift card to her own therapist, Dr. Elliot Kupferberg . Tony apologizes for calling her a "cunt." Kupferberg tells her the gift represents ablution . A.J. is having a difficult time in school and disrespects Carmela . Tony and Carmela visit A.J.'s guidance counselor , Robert Wegler . Carmela partly blames A.J.'s unsatisfactory academic record on her separation from Tony. Tony buys A.J. a new Nissan Xterra as a "motivational tool" to get better grades, saying that Carmela will keep the keys until his grades improve. A.J. asks his mother if he can attend a Mudvayne concert in New York with friends. Carmela agrees on the condition that he spend the night at Meadow's apartment; but on the night, A.J. calls Meadow to tell her that he will not be coming, and she reluctantly agrees to cover for him. Staying in a hotel, A.J. and his friends get drunk and high. The next morning, A.J. wakes with his face glued to the carpet, and his eyebrows shaved off and redrawn with a permanent marker. In the ensuing argument at home, A.J. sells a false story, which Tony appears willing to buy. Carmela blames herself for A.J.'s actions and says Tony should take A.J. to live with him. At Tony's, A.J. bonds with his father, Tony B , and Artie as they watch TV until Tony sends him upstairs to do his homework. Wegler invites Carmela to lunch. She discusses A.J.'s troubles as well as her own. He recommends that she read Gustave Flaubert's novel Madame Bovary , noting parallels between Carmela and the book's protagonist. She returns to the empty family house.
Tony has a mole removed, later determined to be a squamous skin cancer . Adriana is being treated for irritable bowel syndrome caused by stress. Tony spends more time at her club and, with Christopher traveling to North Carolina on a cigarette smuggling job, is alone with her in her office. The two bond over recent problems and snort cocaine together. They are about to kiss but are interrupted. Tony resumes his psychiatric therapy; he tells Dr. Melfi that a relationship with Adriana would lead to problems with both Chris and Carmela . Melfi commends Tony for this breakthrough in therapy. On the eve of Chris' return, Tony and Adriana drive to Dover to buy cocaine. Tony swerves to avoid a raccoon , and his SUV flips over to the driver's side. Tony is released from the hospital unhurt. Adriana is bruised and has a head injury. Tony suggests a cover story to explain why they were alone together in the early morning: they were going to get something to eat. However, Tony's crew and their associates play an unintentional game of "telephone" with the story of the accident. The details get more elaborate and lurid with each retelling; the final version is that Adriana was fellating him when the accident happened. Chris learns of the accident from his crew and is immediately suspicious. At Satriale's , he loses his temper and nearly starts a fight with Vito , who is now a capo . At a face-to-face meeting, Tony turns the conversation against Chris, telling him he does not deserve a woman as good-looking as Adriana. He swears on his children that the rumors of their affair are untrue. At home, Adriana admits that she and Tony were going to see her drug dealer, but insists that nothing happened between them. Chris batters her and physically throws her out. He then relapses . Chris, drunk, arrives at the Bing and empties his pistol into Tony's car before entering the club, where he is overpowered. Tony and his crew take him to the Meadowlands, where Tony prepares to execute him if he doesn't acknowledge that nothing happened. However, at Tony B's suggestion, Chris is taken to the doctor who treated Tony and Adriana on the night of the accident. Though they are threatening him, the doctor freely acknowledges that Adriana's injuries show that she was wearing her seat belt and sitting upright when the accident occurred. Chris, though placated, feels like a laughing stock . Agent Sanseverino , believing the final version of the story of Adriana and Tony, wants Adriana to exploit their supposed relationship by planting listening devices in her club. Adriana is furious and moves to get out of the car. As she is leaving, Sanseverino tries to warn her that by staying with Chris she is protecting her abuser. Tony convinces Carmela that there is nothing between him and Adriana. In a show of unity, Tony and Carmela, Chris and Adriana, and Tony B and Quintina Blundetto arrive to dine at Nuovo Vesuvio, where most of Tony's crew are eating at other tables. Vito approaches them and shakes Chris' hand, wishing him a pleasant evening, resolving the tension between them.
Tony is finding it increasingly difficult to take care of A.J. , who is sent back to Carmela . She lets him move back in on the condition that he improve his grades and behavior. Carmela goes to see Mr. Wegler at the school and agrees to have dinner with him the following evening. After dinner, they go to his home and have sex. Carmela meets Father Phil Intintola ; he reminds her that she made a commitment to her husband before God. However, she continues the affair, even after making formal confession. One evening with Wegler she abruptly leaves, saying she is upset about A.J.’s academic performance, and also troubled by the laws of the Church. The next day, Wegler pressures  A.J.'s English teacher to raise his grade for a poorly written term paper. After several rounds of sex after which Carmela talks each time about A.J., Wegler concludes that she is just using him to get her son better grades, and tells her he wants to end the relationship. Carmela is deeply hurt and, after an argument, storms out. When her father suggests that she look for other men, Carmela replies that, as Tony's wife, her motives will always be distrusted. Tony B tries to adjust to civilian life. Kim, his Korean-American employer, who was pressured by Tony Soprano into giving him a job, is hostile. But he changes his mind when he realizes how hard Tony B is working, both on the job and in his efforts to pass the state massage board exam. Kim offers to partner up with him, since he has an empty storefront in West Caldwell . Tony B passes the exam and begins work on the storefront, preparing it for business. But then he comes across a bag containing $12,000, thrown away by fleeing drug dealers, and goes on a self-destructive tear, burning most of the money on gambling , alcohol, and expensive clothes. Kim visits the store and encourages him to keep on working. Tony B, sleepless, and under physical and emotional pressure, snaps, and beats him up. With Tony at Nuovo Vesuvio, Tony B hints that he screwed up and asks if he still needs someone to cover the airbag scheme.
Tony's Aunt Concetta dies. After the funeral , Tony happens to meet Fran Felstein , his father's longtime comàre , at his father's grave. They continue to meet, and Tony learns more about his father from her. He learns that, pressured by his mother Livia , his father took his childhood dog Tippy away; he gave it to Fran, and it became her son's dog. Fran also remembers Junior who, she says, almost used to stalk her; Junior tells Tony he loved her but was not bold enough to tell her. Fran also tells Tony about a one-time fling with President John F. Kennedy . Tony and Fran tour a midget car racetrack in New Egypt ; she has explained that Tony's father had promised to leave her a share of the racetrack, but that Phil and Hesh Rabkin cheated her out of it. Tony undertakes to collect the money on her behalf and has a sitdown with Phil and Hesh, mediated by Johnny . While Hesh agrees to pay, Phil objects to paying 25% and delays payment. When Tony spots him in the street, there is a car chase that ends with Phil crashing into a truck. Later, Tony is able to collect $150,000 for Fran. Junior, with his mental health and memory now improved due to new medication, says he is going stir crazy while still under house arrest . He begins going to every funeral he can, even when he knows the deceased only slightly, just to get out of the house. However, at the funeral of Concetta's husband, who died shortly after his wife, Junior begins crying uncontrollably and has to be helped away by Bobby and Janice. Junior later breaks down in his physician's office when he mentions the lack of purpose in his life. Christopher begins to spend time with J.T. Dolan , a television screenwriter he met in rehab. The two offer to support one another when they get the urge to use. After he loses a sports bet to J.T., Chris introduces him to the family's high-stakes poker games. J.T. runs up $60,000 in debt and starts missing payments; Chris and Little Paulie go to his apartment and beat him up. J.T. loses some writing jobs, causing him to turn to heroin . Chris then helps direct him back toward rehab. Tony's friendship with Fran begins to sour as he learns that his father was often with her when he was needed, including the night Livia was hospitalized for a miscarriage ; on that occasion, Tony had to lie to his mother to protect his father. Furthermore, Fran starts to openly disparage Livia to Tony and, after claiming she was broke, buys expensive clothes with the money he obtained for her. Dr. Melfi suggests he could have more sympathy for Livia, forgive her, and forget. Tony remains unsympathetic, saying that Livia did make his father give Tippy away. As the episode closes, Tony starts regaling his buddies at the Bada Bing with exaggerated accounts of Fran's involvement with JFK.
After the recent car chase , Tony meets with Johnny and agrees to pay for the damage to Phil's car. To control costs, he has the work done in the late Pussy's body shop, now run by his widow Angie . When the work is finished, Phil demands further repairs for non-existent defects. Tensions rise in New York . Little Carmine's yacht is holed and sinks. His crew attempt to recruit Tony B through Angelo , his old prison buddy. Angelo and Rusty offer him "a chance to earn": in retaliation for Johnny's hit on Lorraine , "someone has to go". Tony B, knowing that Tony wants to keep his family out of New York hostilities, refuses. But he is short of money, and his young sons envy the Sopranos' standard of living. He agrees. His assigned target is Joey Peeps . Tony B finds him in his car outside a New York brothel where he has just collected a payment, and shoots him along with the girl, a prostitute , he is giving a lift to. Tony B's foot is injured when Peeps's car rolls over it, and he hobbles back to his own car. Carmela is planning a surprise party for her father Hugh De Angelis's 75th birthday. Nudged by her mother Mary , she tells Tony that, because of the separation, it would be better if he did not attend. Tony is taken aback, but consents. Mary does not want him there because she thinks his vulgar behavior will embarrass her in front of an old friend, Russ Fegoli, who will be attending with his wife. Mary has enormous respect for Fegoli, who had a modest career in the Foreign Service. Junior tells Hugh about the party, intentionally ruining the surprise. Hugh insists that the "man of the house" attend. Carmela reluctantly invites Tony at short notice. At the party, Mary is duly embarrassed by Tony's behavior. Tony presents Hugh with a Beretta Giubileo shotgun, but Fegoli observes that the best ones are not exported. At the end of the evening, Tony roughly puts the now-devalued shotgun in the trunk of the car. As the Fegolis are leaving, Mary apologizes to them for Tony's conduct. Carmela is furious at her mother's snobbery, commending Tony for his gift to her father and his courtesy to the guests. As Artie leads the younger guests in a game of Marco Polo , Tony and A.J. grab Carmela and throw her into the pool. Eventually, Tony and Carmela find themselves alone. They kiss in the pool and spend the night together. He leaves in the morning before she wakes.
Tony notices Tony B's foot injury, which he blames on an attempted assault by several black men. The next day, Tony learns from Johnny that Joey Peeps's killer was limping. He nearly passes out from a panic attack . Confronted by Tony, Tony B calmly denies his involvement. Tony, aware of his cousin's tough financial situation, decides to put him in control of an illegal casino on Bloomfield Avenue and have him made . Christopher resents this favoritism. At Joey's funeral , Johnny realizes that Little Carmine engineered the hit as payback for Lorraine Calluzzo's murder. Johnny suspects Tony B's involvement because one of his informants saw him near the scene of the crime. In a confrontation with Johnny, Tony makes up an alibi for Tony B. Johnny reluctantly accepts the story, but wordlessly threatens Tony if he finds out he is lying. In a session with Dr. Melfi , Tony's panic attacks are traced to his recent encounters with Tony B. He admits the truth about what really happened the night Tony B was arrested in 1986. Tony had a panic attack after arguing with his mother Livia and covered it up with a story of being beaten up by black men. Tony realizes that he has been assuaging his own guilt and shame. A faux pas causes tensions between Meadow's boyfriend, Finn DeTrolio , and Tony. After they make amends, Tony gets Finn a job at a mob-run construction site, where several members of his crew have "no-work" jobs. In the unfamiliar situation, Finn is uneasy. Uneasiness turns into fear after he witnesses a violent encounter between Eugene Pontecorvo and Little Paulie over homophobic jibes. The next day, Finn arrives at work early in the morning, and accidentally catches Vito performing oral sex on a male security guard. Later, Vito tries to coerce Finn into attending a New York Yankees game with him. Fearing for his life, Finn considers leaving New Jersey for the time being, prompting a heated argument with Meadow, which goes on through the night. Sometime after four o'clock, he proposes to her. Carmela finally decides to divorce Tony and obtain her share of their assets. He is furious; looming over her he says, "You're entitled to shit." During a consultation, Carmela becomes encouraged when she learns that a forensic accountant could discover Tony's unreported financial assets. After contacting several lawyers, Carmela realizes that Tony has consulted them all to prevent them from taking her case, and no forensic accountant is willing to assess his finances. She becomes tearful looking out the window at Tony floating in the swimming pool, while Meadow calls her on the phone and tells her about her engagement.
Tony and Johnny meet about a missing load of smuggled Vespa scooters that were supposed to be received by Carlo Gervasi's crew and split between the two families. Johnny denies any knowledge about the Vespas and makes a pointed reference to Tony's continued denial that Tony B was involved in the hit on Joey . Tony suspects Johnny seized the whole shipment for himself and sends Benny and a member of Carlo's crew to the port to investigate. They brutally interrogate a security guard, who tells them that Phil took the scooters. A shipment of expensive Italian cheeses is coming in; fearing more financial losses, Tony loses his temper in front of his crew. Tony asks Tony B and Christopher to remove three bodies from Uncle Pat Blundetto's farm in Kinderhook , New York , which is about to have new owners. Chris complains to Adriana about the two Tonys' past treatment of him. Adriana suggests they leave New Jersey and start over elsewhere, but Chris replies that he is a soldier for life. Despite early tensions, Chris and Tony B bond as they gradually dispose of the bodies. However, when Tony comes to oversee the completion of the job, the two older men fall back into their routine of picking on Chris, with Tony making fun of Chris's sobriety. Chris passes up an opportunity to go hunting with them and leaves the farm early the next morning, driving home in tears. Tony returns to the Bada Bing and, prompted by a TV program he has seen, talks about terrorist threats tied to unexamined cargo containers at the ports. When Georgie Santorelli responds by saying "that's why you gotta live for today," Tony suddenly explodes in fury and gives him a beating that sends him to the hospital and causes some permanent hearing loss. Afterward, Tony is remorseful, and gives Paulie a wad of bills and insists that he make sure Georgie receives the best care. Paulie then tells Tony that Georgie is quitting his job at the Bing and doesn't want to see him again. Carmela continues to be hostile towards Tony and drains the water from their house's pool to keep him from swimming there. After another fight, they agree to organize an engagement party for Meadow and Finn . When she runs into Mr. Wegler at A.J.'s school, she surprises herself by saying that she is moving back in with her husband, but later insists to Rosalie that she has no such intention. Janice is arrested after assaulting another mother at her stepdaughter's soccer game. Tony is infuriated over the publicity brought to his family and storms into Janice's house late at night, demanding she plead guilty to the charges and that Bobby "take control" of his wife. Citing her recent bellicose behavior, Bobby gives Janice an ultimatum to either see an anger management specialist or end their marriage. Janice starts attending anger management classes and tells Tony that they have helped her make tremendous progress; Tony says he is happy for her. The "Soprano temper" becomes the focus of Tony's next session with Dr. Melfi , who observes that both depression and anger are traits in the Soprano family. Tony joins Janice and Bobby for dinner but becomes irritated when he sees his newly placid sister deal calmly with a series of minor annoyances. He breaks the calm by provoking her with sarcastic and increasingly hurtful comments about her estranged son, Harpo. Janice soon gets enraged and chases Tony round the room with a fork in her fist. Smiling to himself, he leaves.
Cooking for Tony , his girlfriend Valentina accidentally sets fire to the sleeve of her nylon kimono and is badly burned. After visiting her in a hospital burn unit, Tony calls on Tony B . Tony notices that his cousin is behaving erratically, but does not know the reason. Tony B has just learned that Angelo , his former cellmate and close friend, has been murdered by Phil and Billy Leotardo . Tony B says he has to leave soon with his sons, so Tony himself leaves. Tony checks into a luxury suite at the Plaza Hotel "to get a good night's sleep", and nearly runs into Dr. Melfi there. When evening comes, a bored Tony starts drinking and nuisance-calls Charmaine Bucco , to whom he is attracted; she tells her unknown caller to stop it. He makes a call for an Asian girl from an escort agency . He gets a voicemail from Silvio telling him about Angelo's murder. He immediately tries to call Tony B, who is already on the move and is not answering his phone. Tony then frantically calls Tony B's casino, Aunt Quintina , and the Bada Bing , telling everyone to let Tony B know he is looking for him. The prostitute arrives and, at some point, Tony falls asleep and has a long and vivid dream. Tony awakens with a start. Shortly afterward, he receives a visit from Christopher , who tells him that Tony B has killed Billy and wounded Phil. Tony goes to bed and, though it is not dawn yet, calls Carmela. He says, "I had one of my Coach Molinaro dreams." She is half asleep and they have a gentle, slow conversation.
Little Carmine recoils from the escalating violence of the New York mob war, and Johnny Sack becomes the new boss of the Lupertazzi crime family. In a sit-down with Tony , both Johnny and Phil make threats against his blood relations. Johnny says he wants Tony B "on a fucking spit". Tony B, in hiding, calls Tony to apologize. Tony tells him not to come back and says he will look after his sons. He further admits why he was not at the hijack where Tony B was arrested decades earlier, saying that he has always felt guilty; "Now we're even". Ending the call, they tell each other to take care. Tony has the call traced. His cousin is in upstate New York , near their uncle's now-empty house. Tony and Johnny meet alone. Tony says he knows where Tony B is, and what has to be done. Johnny refuses to let Tony handle it himself and states that Tony B will be at Phil's mercy. Tony then refuses to give up Tony B's location and the meeting ends in antagonism. Tony punishes Christopher for bungling a cigarette smuggling operation. Back home, Chris rants about Tony's treatment of him and what he sees as his favoritism towards Tony B. Adriana , stressed, is diagnosed with ulcerative colitis . When FBI surveillance of Adriana's nightclub catches her behaving oddly with a bag of garbage, she is brought in. She admits that she was cleaning up after a murder in her office: drug dealer Matush Giamona killed a customer who claimed he had been ripped off. Threatened with imprisonment for covering up the murder, Adriana is told she has to wear a wire. She refuses but persuades the FBI that Chris is ready to turn. They let her go, with a deadline for bringing him in. When Adriana tells Chris she has been talking to the FBI, he reacts violently and begins to strangle her before he breaks down crying. They eventually agree to flee and start a new life. However, while getting gas for his Hummer H2 the next morning, he pensively observes a poor family in front of the gas station, their meager possessions strapped to the roof of a run-down car. Adriana soon receives a call from Tony. He tells her that Chris has tried to kill himself but is all right; Silvio will come to take her to the hospital. Instead, he drives her to an area of deserted woodland, turns off the road onto a track, and stops. Adriana realizes that Silvio has been ordered by Tony to kill her, and begs for her life. He drags her out of the car. As she crawls away, crying, he shoots and kills her off-screen. Chris dumps a suitcase of her belongings in a riverside dumping ground and puts her car in long-term parking at the airport . At the Bada Bing , Tony sees that Chris is doped on heroin ; Chris says the pain is too much. Tony loses control and beats him up, saying Chris is not the only one with pain. Tony and Carmela negotiate over her desire to build a house on spec in partnership with her father. Tony agrees to pay $600,000 for the land. He promises that his " midlife crisis will no longer intrude anymore" into their marriage. They are reconciled and he moves back in. Tony goes to see Valentina in the hospital and breaks up with her. She is furious with Tony, and devastated.
A.J. plans a party with a friend, and they end up making $300 profit each. Carmela tells Tony that A.J. asked his guidance counselor which colleges would be suitable for studying event planning . They find some solace in the fact that A.J. is at least "fired up about something." Christopher disposes of Adriana's last remaining possessions. Carmela phones looking for her, and Chris says that they broke up and she left town. Tony asks him whether he said anything to Adriana about Matthew Bevilaqua or Ralphie Cifaretto that she could have repeated to the FBI. Chris says he did not and assures Tony that he is staying sober and exercising. Phil reclaims his brother Billy's body from the morgue, and demands that Johnny retaliate against the New Jersey mob. Ray Curto , who continues to provide information to the FBI , not knowing that Adriana has been killed for being an informant, has a birthday dinner. Those present are restive at Tony's continued protection of his cousin, Tony B . With Phil seeking revenge, they are all in danger. Tony delivers a speech: he explains that he is saving Tony B from torture; he would do the same for them; they must unite as a family. Phil tries to track down Chris as an alternative target of his revenge, noting his closeness to Tony. He threatens Chris's mother. Chris then goes into hiding with the help of Benny , but Phil finds Benny and beats him up, fracturing his skull. Tony goes to Junior for advice, but he cannot help, distracted by dementia . At a consultation, Dr. Melfi reminds Tony that his concern for Tony B comes primarily from his feelings of guilt. Silvio tells Tony of the growing discontent in the family and asserts he is shielding Tony B out of pride, which Tony angrily rejects. Tony visits Paulie , having heard he is among those dissatisfied with his leadership. In Paulie's living room, he discovers the portrait of himself with his horse Pie-O-My , which he had wanted to be destroyed after the horse's death. Unbeknownst to him, Paulie had kept the painting and had it altered, changing Tony's clothes to those of a colonial general. When Tony demands to know why he had him painted as a " lawn jockey ," Paulie says that he did it out of sincere admiration for Tony as a leader. Tony pauses, but then rips the painting off the wall and puts it in a dumpster, much to Paulie's discontent. Tony B is hiding out at Uncle Pat's vacated Kinderhook , New York farmhouse. He is returning with some shopping; Tony appears around a corner with a pump-action shotgun and kills him. Tony then tells Phil and Johnny where Tony B can be found. Phil arrives expecting to exact his revenge, but only finds the body. Johnny tells Tony that Tony B's death "didn't solve a thing." Tony meets Johnny at his New Jersey house and offers a percentage of Tony B's Bloomfield Avenue casino as a peace offering to Phil. At the moment the feud is settled, Tony looks over Johnny's shoulder and sees armed men approaching. They both run away. It is the FBI, who arrest Johnny. Tony throws his handgun into the snow and navigates the neighborhood to avoid the Feds. A few hours later, he calls his lawyer, Neil Mink , who informs him that Johnny was betrayed by Jimmy Petrille , his consigliere . Tony was not mentioned in the indictment . He arrives home disheveled and worn out.
Nearly two years have passed. Janice is raising a new daughter with Bobby Baccalieri , who has taken up model railroading as a hobby. Meadow continues her relationship with Finn . A.J. is now attending college. Adriana is remembered by a worrying Carmela . Vito is thinner and is now a spokesperson for a weight loss company; he is Tony's best earner and is ambitious. Phil Leotardo , now the acting boss of the Lupertazzi crime family , is taking care of business for the imprisoned Johnny Sack . In Brooklyn , Hesh Rabkin and his son-in-law Eli Kaplan are assaulted by Lupertazzi associates. Trying to escape, Eli is knocked down by a hit-and-run driver and seriously injured. At Hesh's request, Tony tries to reach out directly to Johnny through his optometrist brother-in-law, Anthony Infante , but Johnny is only paying attention to his immediate family's financial troubles. Tony, Vito, and Christopher , now a capo in the Soprano family , meet with Phil and Gerry "The Hairdo" Torciano . Disputes between Tony and Phil are resolved, and it is explained that the New York associates were protecting Gerry's area and did not know Eli was associated with the Sopranos; they agree to pay Eli $50,000 compensation. Carmela's construction of her spec house is suspended, due to a "stop order" issued by a building inspector because improper lumber has been used. Her father, Hugh De Angelis , thinks an inspector he used to know would waive the requirement, but his contact has retired. Carmela repeatedly asks Tony to see if he can get the stop order lifted, but he keeps putting it off. Eugene Pontecorvo inherits $2 million and would like to retire with his family to Florida . Bearing gifts, he goes to Tony to ask permission. Tony reminds Eugene that he took an oath . Later, Eugene gives him a cut of the inheritance. At Chris's behest, he then kills a debtor; in return, Chris says, "I'll put in a good word to T about the Florida thing." Tony's decision is relayed through Silvio : "Your Florida thing. That's a no-go." Eugene is also an informant for the FBI , and has become more valuable to the Bureau since the death of Ray Curto ; they, too, will not free him. With his wife bitter and his son using heroin , Eugene hangs himself. Uncle Junior's mind is deteriorating. Tony helps him look for some money he thinks he buried in his backyard thirty years ago, but they find nothing. Both Dr. Melfi and Janice suggest a retirement home or assisted living for him, but Tony forcefully refuses. One afternoon, Junior is particularly agitated, and Tony goes to his house because no one else is free to look after him. While Tony is cooking dinner, Junior, thinking he is a long-dead mobster, shoots him in the stomach. While Junior cowers in a closet upstairs, Tony manages to dial 911 before passing out.
Two days after being shot by Junior , Tony remains in an induced coma . Doctors encourage Carmela and others to talk to him and play him music in hope of recovery. However, they also warn that he could die or be left with brain damage . Carmela, Christopher , Meadow and Barbara keep a vigil over Tony, while Janice sobs uncontrollably whenever she sees him. Meanwhile, a confused Junior is held in custody and denies that he shot his nephew. Silvio assumes Tony's responsibilities as acting boss , and it is decided to cut Junior off from the Soprano family , making Tony the official boss. Chris, Paulie , and Vito vie for small opportunities to assist Tony's family during the crisis, such as sending presents to his room and bickering over giving a ride home to A.J. Alone with Tony, Carmela passionately expresses her love for him. Meadow reads him a translation of the poem Pater Noster by Jacques Prévert . Meanwhile, A.J. becomes increasingly withdrawn and avoids Tony's hospital room, claiming to have a stomach flu . He admits to Meadow that he is embarrassed and angered by the actions of his family. A.J. finally gathers enough courage to talk to his comatose father when they are alone, and vows to kill Junior. Afterward, he admits to Carmela that he flunked junior college. She looks at him in stunned disbelief but holds in her anger and sends him away. At Satriale's , Chris encounters FBI Agents Harris and Goddard , who ask him to pass along any information he might hear about terrorist activities. At the Bada Bing , he talks briefly with two Arab men who are now regulars there. While he is in a coma, Tony has a long dream-like experience that is woven through the episode. Tony briefly awakens from his coma and rips out his breathing tube. The dream resumes when he is placed in another coma.
Paulie and a member of his crew burglarize an apartment belonging to Colombian drug dealers in Newark . The apartment is not empty as expected and a fierce firefight ensues, leading to the deaths of the building superintendent and two drug dealers. There is a huge score, but it contributes to rising tensions within the Soprano family : Silvio makes rulings on how the money, and Eugene's former Roseville bookmaking revenue, should be split. None of the parties involved like his decisions. A reluctant boss, Silvio is later hospitalized after an asthma attack. In case Tony does not recover, Paulie and Vito delay paying the cut they owe to Carmela. Vito quietly starts a campaign to position himself as a potential new leader, maintaining a cordial relationship with the Lupertazzi acting boss Phil Leotardo , who is a second cousin of Vito's wife Marie . He also happens to be in the hospital when Meadow's fiancé Finn turns up and makes a threatening pass at him. Christopher and Bobby confront A.J. when he attempts to buy a gun, intending to take revenge on Junior . Carmela sees a news report about the shooting, in which A.J. remarks that it is weird growing up in their family. She yells at her son, furiously telling him he is a "cross to bear", and then sobs in her room. The next day, she tells Dr. Melfi that while she knew what Tony was when she married him, their kids "don't decide who they're born to." Chris' passion for the movie industry is reborn. He has Benny Fazio and Murmur rough up screenwriter J.T. Dolan , and orders him to write a script for a slasher mob film he wants to produce . Chris later arranges a meeting with potential investors, the chief adviser and partner being Little Carmine . J.T. comes up with the title, Cleaver , and explains the premise to the investors, including Silvio, Vito, and Larry Boy Barese , but they seem confused about its plot. Nevertheless, Chris assures them the film is a guaranteed success. Although only family members are allowed to see Tony, Silvio and Paulie are smuggled in by Carmela and Meadow. Alone with Tony, Paulie treats his unconscious boss to a tedious and discontented monologue about his current life. Tony's heart rate escalates steadily, but Paulie does not notice it until he goes into cardiac arrest . Hospital staff rush in. Tony's dream sequence from the previous episode has continued. Tony awakes in the hospital, asking, "I'm dead, right?" Later, heavily sedated and still almost unable to talk, Tony listens to an excited Christopher explain his movie venture to him; he says he left a position for Tony to become a major investor. Christopher then notices an Ojibwe saying taped onto the wall: "Sometimes I go about in pity for myself, and all the while, a great wind carries me across the sky." With Tony now conscious, Paulie and Vito anxiously rush to get their cuts to Carmela. They hand over the cash and she is grateful, but as they are leaving in the elevator, she turns around and sees them looking sour.
Tony's condition improves as he awaits final surgery, and his temperament seems softer. When Aaron Arkaway and Pastor Bob Brewster, an evangelical minister, visit him, he joins them in prayer. He spends his remaining days at the hospital interacting with two patients, John Schwinn and rapper Da Lux, who has been shot seven times. Da Lux invites Tony to watch a boxing match in his hospital room. Paulie is there and laments that everyone is alone, like the boxers; Schwinn argues, "Nothing is separate; everything is connected." Tony confides to Schwinn that he is starting to believe they are all part of something bigger. Bobby gets talking to Marvin, a member of Da Lux's entourage. Da Lux's injuries, it is believed, will help his career by providing him a huge boost in " street cred ," while Marvin is struggling for fame as a musician. Bobby proposes to Marvin that he jump-start his career by shooting him in the "fleshy part of the thigh." The fee agreed is $8,000; Marvin only pays $7,000, which Bobby reluctantly accepts. He then shoots Marvin in the buttocks. On her deathbed, Paulie's aunt Dottie, a nun, confesses to him that during World War II she had an affair with a soldier and gave birth to a child, Paulie himself. Nucci , who he knows as his mother, is really his aunt. Devastated by the news and questioning his own identity, Paulie struggles to remain focused at work. After Dottie's funeral, which he does not attend, Paulie tells Nucci she is no longer part of his life. When Paulie confides in Tony, he urges him to reconcile with Nucci, reminding him that she brought him up and loved him, and has bailed him out many times. Tony confronts the paramedic who checked his wallet and accuses him of stealing $2,000. The man denies it, but Christopher and others threaten him if he fails to repay the money. Following Dick Barone's death, his son Jason has taken over the family sanitation business and is trying to sell it, not knowing it is the Soprano family's front . Though ordered not to go ahead, he is too far along to back out. The company trying to buy Barone's routes is associated with Johnny . Tony finally accepts an offer from him and allows the sale to go through. Tony also promises Jason's mother that no harm will come to her son. The pleading of a mother for her son drives Paulie to leave the hospital room in tears. As Tony leaves the hospital, the paramedic approaches with an envelope of cash; he does not take it. As he is wheeled outside, Tony takes a few moments to observe the bustle of life. He grabs Janice's hand and comments that "every day is a gift" to him now. On a riverbank, Paulie finds Jason getting ready to go rowing. He viciously beats him with a metal pole and demands a monthly cut from him equal to the cost of Nucci's retirement home expenses. Brandishing a gun, he warns him not to say a word to Tony.
A judge decides Junior's mental condition has deteriorated to the level where he can be held in a private psychiatric facility while awaiting his retrial. Tony does not want to see or hear of his uncle again. Carmela quickly fetches a newspaper with a report about Junior's "cushy psych lockup" and throws that section in the trash before Tony can see it. At the Bada Bing , Ahmed and Muhammad ask Chris about getting some Tec-9 semi-automatic weapons for their "family troubles." Dealing with a phone call, Chris does not answer. Johnny is granted a six-hour strictly controlled release from prison in order to attend his daughter Allegra's wedding, all extra security expenses to be borne by him. At the wedding, Tony collapses bending down to remove his shoes at the request of U.S. Marshals . During the reception, he talks to Johnny for the first time since his arrest. Through Phil , Tony has received Johnny's request to take care of killing New York capo Rusty Millio who, Johnny fears, may trigger another power struggle within the Lupertazzi family ; Tony has refused. As a personal favor, Johnny himself asks Tony to do it. Watched by U.S. Marshals, they join Johnny's aged relatives, either deaf or senile, at a large table and, pretending to speak to them, discuss the situation obliquely. Tony reluctantly agrees. Shortly after, he suggests to Christopher that a contact from Italy should be brought in to kill Rusty and leave the country the same day. Johnny's happiness at the wedding is cut short when the Marshals tell him his time is up. He cries in front of the guests as Marshals haul him away; his wife Ginny faints. Led by Phil, the Lupertazzis and Tony's crew speak of their loss of respect for Johnny. Only Tony stands up for him. At home later that night, Vito tells his wife he is heading out to make collections, but instead goes to a gay club . Dancing in leather fetish garb, he is spotted by two New York associates making collections. Although Vito tries to pass it off as a joke, they call him a " fag " and leave. Vito collects a gun and some cash from home and checks into a motel. After an exploratory phone call to Silvio , he makes no further contact with anyone and does not return calls from Tony. Tony returns to work with a new bodyguard and driver, Perry Annunziata , a muscular, hot-headed young man. Tony shows his scar to his crew and begins to bore them describing his medical procedures. He tells Dr. Melfi that they are giving him "certain looks" and are beginning to question his judgment. She advises him to "act as if you are not feeling vulnerable." Tony asserts himself through an act of unpredictable violence: finding a pretext, he starts a one-sided fight with Perry that ends with Perry bleeding on the floor and Tony walking away, seemingly unscathed. However, when he retreats to the bathroom he vomits blood. Leaning on the bathroom sink, he looks at himself in the mirror and smiles. Then he vomits again.
Christopher reports to Tony and his crew that Vito has been spotted in a gay club . Meadow reveals to Carmela that Finn witnessed Vito performing oral sex on a security guard. As a result, Finn is taken by Tony to the back room of Satriale's where, very frightened, he is made to repeat the story for the crew. The main reaction is disgust and anger; Carlo says they should "put him down for the honor of the family." Tony, despite everything, is hesitant to kill Vito. As he tells Dr. Melfi , he abhors homosexuality , and is “a strict Catholic”; but he doesn’t mind what happens between consenting adults, and he cares about Vito as a friend and an earner. "I had a second chance,” he says. “Why shouldn't he?" Benny , Dante Greco and Terry Doria visit Vito and his mistress at a beach house on the Jersey Shore , where he's been lying low. They try to escort him to see Tony, but he speeds away. Vito returns home later that night, kisses his sleeping children, packs some keepsakes, necessities, and cash, and drives off into a stormy night. After his car hits a downed tree branch, he proceeds on foot and finds himself stranded in a small town in New Hampshire . Exhausted, he checks into an inn. Vito has cousins in New Hampshire but cannot find them. He stays in the pleasant town, comfortable in its friendly, open-minded ambiance. Meadow starts an internship at a law firm handling white collar crimes , although she is also working as a volunteer in a law center. In an argumentative conversation with Finn, she contrasts the soft treatment of white-collar criminals with the harsh treatment of others, for example, the humiliation of Johnny at his daughter's wedding. Finn challenges her values and notes her hypocrisy : Tony's crew is going to punish Vito for his sexual orientation . Meadow storms out. Carmela is still pressuring Tony to get permission from the building inspector to move forward with her spec house , which he seems to keep forgetting. She is appalled to find that Hugh has been selling materials salvaged from the construction site. Carmela also discovers that Angie Bonpensiero has secretly branched out into business with members of the crime family, putting money up for street loans and buying stolen car parts. Tony informs Chris that two Italian hitmen will be sent over to the U.S. to kill Rusty , and tells him to hire a "third party" to equip them with weapons and act as an intermediary between the assassins and the Soprano family . Chris gives the task to Corky Caporale , a Soprano family associate who speaks Italian, and pays him in heroin .
Corky Caporale provides the two Italian hitmen hired to kill Rusty with "clean" pistols and directions to his location; they kill Rusty and his bodyguard. At Nuovo Vesuvio, Phil and Tony celebrate the induction of Gerry and Burt Gervasi into their respective crime families . During the party, there are mutters about the deteriorating quality of the restaurant. Tony later has a meal at Da Giovanni, a highly successful rival restaurant. Artie is facing problems at Nuovo Vesuvio: it is losing money and there are tensions with Benny , who is flirting with the new Albanian hostess, Martina. While nursing a drink at the Bada Bing , Artie confronts Tony about dining at Da Giovanni; to provoke him, he alludes to his habitual adultery. Tony does not yield. When he offers some tips to increase the restaurant's popularity, Artie angrily rebuffs him and suggests he settle his outstanding tab if he wants to help. Later, Artie rejects his wife Charmaine's suggestions to stop bothering his guests with table-side visits. Fraud investigators for American Express visit Nuovo Vesuvio because someone is stealing credit card numbers from Artie's customers, and the restaurant's card usage has to be suspended. Artie learns Martina helped Benny steal the numbers and fires her. He then goes to Benny's house in the middle of the night and provokes a fistfight; Benny is left bleeding on his porch. Tony meets separately with the two men and compels them to make peace. At Tony's insistence, Benny's parents have their anniversary dinner at Nuovo Vesuvio. Artie visits them during their meal. In front of his pregnant wife, Artie offers Benny a "martina", explaining that it is an Albanian martini that "goes down real easy". An enraged Benny follows Artie into the kitchen and forces his right hand into a boiling pot of tomato sauce. Christopher asks Tony's permission to fly to Los Angeles with Little Carmine to cast actors for Cleaver , and Tony reluctantly consents. While he is away, Murmur makes rounds for Chris; they include delivering card numbers to Ahmed and Muhammad , who are stealing money via the Internet. Benny takes over Chris' credit card operation, giving a cut to Tony. In L.A., Chris and Little Carmine have a scheduled meeting with Ben Kingsley . He is not interested in Cleaver and interrupts Chris and Carmine to speak to Lauren Bacall , who is to be a presenter at an award show. Chris and Carmine then tag along with him, and Chris is astounded by the great quantity of free expensive luxury items the actor is offered. Chris later phones Kingsley, unsuccessfully asking him to arrange for Chris himself to enter their hotel's Luxury Lounge. When Kingsley turns down Cleaver , Chris summons Murmur to L.A.; he finds Chris intoxicated in his hotel room. Once he sobers up, the two corner Kingsley in an elevator and try to subtly intimidate him into giving them access to the Luxury Lounge. Kingsley blurts out that award presenters get free goods worth around $30,000. Outside the awards show Chris, masked, mugs Bacall, stealing her gift bag. At home, he offers Tony some of the stolen goods, but Tony is more concerned with Chris' lack of focus, blaming his absence for the feud between Artie and Benny.
A.J. spends most of his time hanging out in New York nightclubs. To finance this lifestyle, A.J. sells the drum kit Tony gave him. The money is used to pay a huge tab he racks up trying to seduce a girl, at a club owned by an associate of his father's. AJ asks his parents to provide him with a nightclub to manage, a suggestion they scoff at as he is still below the legal drinking age. Carmela wants him to study event planning and Tony offers to get him a place at Beansie's pizzeria. In a session with Dr. Melfi , Tony says that A.J.'s presence is "like a bad smell in the house. It's always hanging there". One evening, after slumping at home all day, A.J. takes a knife and goes to see Junior in the mental hospital. When Junior sees him, he begs him to take him home. Unnerved, A.J. drops the knife before even attempting to use it against Junior, and is tackled by orderlies as he tries to flee. Using his influence with Assemblyman Zellman , Tony gets his son released from custody without charge. Tony is furious, but A.J. tearfully tells him that he was trying to avenge Tony like Michael Corleone in The Godfather . During A.J.'s next night out clubbing, an acquaintance asks him to get Tony to help him in a dispute with his landlord. A.J. retreats to the restroom, where he has a panic attack . Vito steals the cell phone of a fellow guest at his bed-and-breakfast in New Hampshire , and uses it to call his wife Marie. She begs him to come home and tells him that Phil wishes to put him through " treatment " for his homosexuality . He tells her not to trust Phil (who is pressuring Tony to find Vito and kill him). Vito tells Marie where to find $30,000 cash in the house. Pretending to be a writer, Vito spends more time at Jim's diner. Jim is revealed to also be a father. One evening, Vito sees Jim, a volunteer firefighter, heroically rescuing a young child. He spends an evening with the firefighters at a local roadhouse; in the parking lot, Vito and Jim appear to kiss, but Vito then shoves him off. They throw punches and Jim leaves Vito beaten. Days later, Vito goes back to the diner. "Sometimes you tell a lie so long, you don't know when to stop," he says. They take a motorcycle ride together. In a field, under the falling leaves, they have sex. Tony manages to have sex with Carmela for the first time since his injury, But he later finds himself attracted to another woman: Julianna Skiff , a real estate agent who approaches him with an offer from Jamba Juice to buy a building he owns, rented to a long-established company, Caputo's Poultry. Tony rejects the deal, stating that the poultry store is part of its neighborhood. He rejects a second offer but accepts the third – nearly half a million dollars – and she agrees that they should meet in her apartment to complete the paperwork. While Tony is dressing for the encounter, Carmela helps pick out a shirt for him and helps him to button it up. At Julianna's, after Tony signs the paperwork, they start kissing passionately, and Julianna starts unbuttoning his shirt. Tony makes her stop and abruptly departs. At home with Carmela he lashes out, claiming he's angry because there's no smoked turkey in the fridge. Burt and Patsy make collections in the neighborhood of Tony's property. They fail to extort money from the newly opened branch of a major coffee chain. Caputo furiously tells them Tony has sold his store premises. "What the fuck is happening to this neighborhood?" Patsy says.
Tony and Phil work out a deal to split the profits from the distribution of multivitamins acquired by Tony's crew. Phil suggests that Johnny be left out of the transaction, to which Tony agrees. Chris is told by his girlfriend, Kelli , that she is pregnant. He is thrilled; they get married and buy a large house. On their way home from a trip to Pennsylvania , Chris and Tony stop outside a town because Tony needs to urinate. They see two bikers stealing vintage wine from a liquor store. As the bikers go back into the store, Chris and Tony plunder their wine. They speed away and Chris exchanges gunfire with one of the bikers, wounding him. Exhilarated, Tony and Chris celebrate at a restaurant. Chris decides to break his abstinence when Tony toasts his wedding. Later, as they drink more wine in the parking lot, they reminisce about good and bad times, including the day when Chris told Tony about Adriana and the Feds. They express their long-lasting love and support for each other. Chris pays Corky for the hit on Rusty , partly in heroin . He ends up relapsing and using heroin with Corky, spending a night of the Feast of Elzéar of Sabran in a stupor. During the Feast, Tony and his crew manage a five-day street festival for the benefit, Paulie says, of a non-profit foundation. However, a new priest has looked into the finances and tells Paulie and Patsy that their donation to the church should be raised from $10,000 to $50,000. When Paulie refuses to pay, he tells them they will not be permitted to display the traditional golden hat which adorns the statue of the saint. Several parishioners notice that the hat is missing, and word begins to spread that Paulie scrimped on the festival. Paulie's penny-pinching is blamed for an accident on a teacup ride at the festival, which leaves several people injured, including a child. Little Paulie is left to deal with the police investigation. Janice and her daughter Domenica are on the ride and unhurt, but Janice pretends to develop a neck injury after hearing Meadow's suggestion that the injured should be compensated monetarily. Janice presses Bobby to get the money. Threatening the ride operator, Bobby learns that Paulie refused to pay for a repair crew, or for newer and safer rides. In a public confrontation at the feast, Paulie refuses to compensate Bobby. Tension lingers during Christopher's bachelor party; Tony instructs Paulie to work things out with Bobby. Paulie later encounters Nucci , who tells him that his cost cutting was not only wrong but sinful; Paulie swears at her and departs, leaving his adoptive mother in tears. At home, he is sleepless. Another source of stress is his fear that he has prostate cancer . Very early the next morning, at the Bada Bing , Paulie sees a vision of the Virgin Mary . Shaken, he visits Nucci at Green Grove that night and sits quietly next to her while they watch The Lawrence Welk Show together.
Knowing that a plea agreement with the FBI would involve the confiscation of most of his assets, Johnny sends his brother-in-law Anthony Infante to ask Tony to convince two businessmen in New Orleans , with whom Johnny is a silent partner , to sell their company so he can get his share. Tony reluctantly agrees, but only one of the pair is willing to sell and he does not press the matter. During Ginny's birthday celebration, Janice admires Johnny's house. Tony proposes to Johnny that he will guarantee his partners in New Orleans will sell their company; in exchange, Johnny will sell his house at a discount to Janice and Bobby . Johnny, with few options, agrees. Johnny learns from his lawyer he will have to enter an allocution . In an agonizing decision, he accepts the plea deal . He receives a fifteen-year sentence, forfeits $4.1 million in assets, and admits in court that he was a member of a New York faction of the Mafia . This is met with anger and contempt by the members of his crew. Carmela again pressures Tony to meet with the building inspector and have the stop order lifted on her spec house project.  Because of it, Carmela has less time for the family, for shopping and cooking, and is not there to comfort Meadow , who is distressed by her souring relationship with Finn . Tony enlists Silvio to intercede, but later tells Carmela that the building inspector could not be persuaded, and she should consider selling the spec house. Janice accuses Tony of being unfair to her and Bobby. She claims that he blames them for his being shot by Junior , and that he ridicules Bobby and does not promote him, even though he is Tony's brother-in-law. In therapy with Dr. Melfi , Tony speaks of resentments dating from childhood and admits he is mistreating Janice in revenge; Melfi suggests that her "misery" reminds him of his mother . When Tony obtains the house for her, Janice is overcome with gratitude. While making collections in a dangerous section of Newark , Bobby is mugged by a gang of African-American youths. After they take his money and gun, one of them fires it into the pavement in front of him and sends concrete fragments into his right eye. Paulie calls Tony to deliver the news, and reveals that he is having radiotherapy for early-stage prostate cancer . In New Hampshire , Vito , who now lives with Jim , admits that he left a family and a job in "contracting" in New Jersey . He gets a job as a handyman and wins admiration in the town by assisting the firefighter team in a rescue operation. Vito and Jim declare their love for each other. However, Vito grows discontented with the slow pace of his new life, and one morning, while Jim is still asleep, he leaves. Drinking vodka from the bottle, Vito rounds a corner on a country road and crashes into a parked Jeep Wagoneer . When the owner refuses to take cash as compensation and starts walking  to his home to call the cops, Vito murders him and drives away. Back in New Jersey, he slowly drives through the old neighborhood, stopping briefly in front of Satriale's before speeding off.
Carmela discovers that A.J. was fired from his job and has kept this a secret for three weeks. Tony watches as A.J. types on a chatroom and giggles; disgusted, he tells Dr. Melfi that he hates his son. She points out that Tony wishes his mother had protected him as Carmela protects A.J. Tony finds A.J. a construction job and gently encourages him to "do good". But when A.J. resists him, Tony smashes the windshield of A.J.'s car, warning, "Don't put me to the test." Meadow tells her parents she is moving to California to be with Finn . Carmela visits Paris with Rosalie . She reacts to the ancient city with emotional intensity, and thoughts about past and future, life and death. In a dream she sees Adriana walking her dog by the Eiffel Tower ; a gendarme says in English, "Your friend—someone needs to tell her she's dead." Vito unexpectedly approaches Tony at a mall and tries to convince him he is not really homosexual . He asks to buy his way back into the crew, proposing to run a business in Atlantic City involving prostitution and meth trafficking. Tony brings up the offer with Silvio , Christopher , and Paulie , who are not in favor. Vito has a reunion lunch with his family, telling his children that he has been working as an undercover spy in Afghanistan and that they must never speak about his return. He phones Jim , who totally rebuffs him. Tony has already had a business dispute with Phil , who is now the acting boss of the Lupertazzi family . When they meet again, Phil is angry to learn that Vito is back in town. Tony decides that he can't keep protecting Vito and begins planning his murder. However, when Vito returns that night to his motel room, he is attacked by New York mobsters Fat Dom Gamiello and Gerry Torciano , who knock him down and duct-tape his mouth. Vito mutely pleads for his life as Phil walks out of the closet and watches Dom and Gerry beat him to death with pool cues. Tony understands that Phil is sending a message, that he can kill one of Tony's capos and Tony cannot do anything about it. He decides to hit back at Phil financially, noting that he has "a wire room in Sheepshead Bay ." While Sil and Carlo are at Satriale's , Dom arrives to make a payment and starts making crude jokes about Vito. When he begins to joke that Carlo and Vito were involved romantically, Sil and Carlo impulsively attack and kill him. Tony shows up, sees what has happened, and wordlessly exits, leaving Sil and Carlo to deal with the corpse. When Vito's murder is reported in the newspaper, Francesca and Vito, Jr. learn about their father's occupation and homosexuality.
Carlo disposes of Fat Dom's head in a sewer drain in Connecticut , while Benny blows up Phil's wire room . By chance, Phil is walking towards the place with a woman when it explodes, and they are blown onto their backs. At a sit-down mediated by Little Carmine , Phil and Tony agree to end hostilities. However, things go wrong when Carmine thoughtlessly mentions Phil's murdered brother Billy ; Phil, enraged, insults Tony and Carmine before storming off. Phil then discusses his next step with his capos Gerry , Butchie DeConcini , and Albie Cianflone . When Phil rejects Butchie's suggestion to kill Tony, Butchie suggests picking " somebody over there." Later, Agent Harris quietly tells Tony that his sources in the FBI are saying that someone in his organization may be in danger of retaliation by the Lupertazzi family. Phil has a heart attack . At first, Tony finds joy in his misfortune; but later surprises the New York mobsters by visiting Phil at the hospital. Tony shares with Phil the spiritual knowledge that came to him in his coma ; tells him to take his time recovering and enjoy his grandchildren and the good things in life, and says that later there will be enough for everyone. Phil is left emotional by the scene, breaking down in tears. Tony completes the Jamba Juice deal and tries to revive his relationship with Julianna , only to learn that she is now Christopher's mistress, having met him at an AA meeting. The two relapse into drug use, telling themselves that they can integrate the drugs into their lives. Chris tells Tony and the crew he is seeing a black girl named Kaisha, who he prefers not to introduce to them. Eventually, he tells Tony the truth in order to prevent him from finding out that he is using drugs again. Tony acts indifferent, but to Dr. Melfi he expresses his anger that his reward for marital fidelity is Chris's relationship with the woman he desired for himself. Carmela is thinking about Adriana again because of her dream in Paris , and because her mother, Liz La Cerva , has tried to kill herself in despair. Carmela wants Tony to hire a private investigator to track Adriana down; he tells Silvio to lean on the building inspector so that she can work again on the spec house . When the stop order is lifted, Carmela immediately realizes that it is Tony's work and thanks him profusely. She throws away the detective agency's business card. At the construction site, A.J. meets Blanca Selgado , a Dominican woman who works in the office; she is 10 years older than him and has a toddler named Hector. On their first date, while they watch television in her apartment, a group of youths begin playing loud music outside, waking Hector. She says her ex-boyfriend used to beat the youths. A.J. resolves the dispute by bribing them with an expensive mountain bike given by his parents. He and Blanca then have sex. The Baccalieris, DeAngelis, and Moltisantis join the Sopranos at their home for Christmas Eve , although Meadow has stayed in California . A.J. arrives with Blanca and Hector. His parents welcome her but, aside, murmur their reservations. Carmela takes Tony's hand; the Christmas tree is piled high with gifts; Christmas music is playing; almost the entire extended family is gathered, it seems, peacefully.
In Brooklyn , a party is held for Phil Leotardo , who has recently returned from the hospital after a long convalescence following his heart attack . Phil tells the Lupertazzi crime family that he is ready to settle down and "enjoy [his] grandchildren." A flashback two years shows Tony Soprano fleeing into the woods when Johnny Sack is arrested by the FBI . A teenage boy sees Tony throw a pistol into the snow and retrieves it. In the present, the boy is arrested on a drug charge and the gun is found in his possession, armed with hollow-point bullets . Essex County police ostentatiously arrest Tony on a gun charge based on the boy's testimony. He is briefly jailed but his attorney, Neil Mink , easily secures his release on bail . The gun charge is soon dropped, and no longer hangs over his approaching birthday weekend. The FBI later includes this charge in a RICO case being built against Tony. Tony and Carmela travel to Janice and Bobby's cabin in upstate New York to celebrate Tony's birthday. Tony and Bobby bond as they fire a customized AR-10 assault rifle , Bobby's birthday present to Tony, in the nearby woods. Tony tasks Bobby with a new set of responsibilities in the Soprano family , and hints at a still higher position in the near future. Bobby muses how suddenly and silently death can happen in their lives as gangsters: "You probably don't even hear it when it happens, right?" Tony comments that Bobby has never "popped his cherry" (killed anyone) in contrast with Bobby's father , who according to Tony, was a notorious hit man in his time. Bobby replies that he has come close, but that his father never wanted it for him. Carmela phones A.J. ; he answers the phone, not at the pizzeria where he is now working, but in his parents' bed with Blanca . A group of friends also come for a party. After dinner, Tony, Carmela, Bobby, and Janice play Monopoly , arguing about house rules , drinking, and joking. Tony is angry with Janice when she tells a story that discredits their father . He makes a crude joke about her in return, hollowly apologizes, but then makes another, provoking Bobby to punch him in the face. There is a messy and ferocious fight. Tony ends up on the floor, bloodied, unable to rise. Panicking, Bobby tries to drive off drunk and backs into a tree; he returns and apologizes. Janice is enraged with Bobby, fearing retaliation from Tony. In the morning, Tony and Carmela are persuaded to stay, but Tony fixates on his loss in the fight. In the afternoon, the women apprehensively watch Tony and Bobby leave, ostensibly for a game of golf. In reality, the two men are meeting with a pair of Québécois . In exchange for a large amount of expired prescription medication at a heavy discount, Tony agrees to a hit on the brother-in-law of one of the Québécois and asks Bobby to personally take care of it. Bobby has to accept. They return to the cabin and Carmela and Tony leave for home. Bobby immediately sets off for Montreal for the hit; he kills the man at point-blank range , drops the gun and walks off. He returns to the cabin, picks up his daughter, and hugs her. Back home, Tony watches a "Soprano Home Movies" DVD given to him by Janice as a birthday present: it shows himself and Janice as children, playing together. [1] [2]
Johnny Sack is transferred to a prison hospital after being diagnosed with small-cell lung cancer . He dies with his wife and two daughters at his bedside. In New York, Phil forgoes leadership of the Lupertazzi family in favor of his protégé, Gerry Torciano . However, at dinner in a restaurant with Silvio , Gerry is killed on the orders of Faustino "Doc" Santoro . Tony, furious that Sil was put in danger, urges Little Carmine to vie again for control of the Lupertazzis. Carmine declines; his wife has said, "I don't want to be the wealthiest widow on Long Island ." On what would have been Billy's 47th birthday, Phil bitterly speaks to Butch about his "weakness", in particular after Billy was killed; he says there will be no more compromise. Meadow has broken up with Finn , while Blanca is getting fed up with A.J. Tony is approached by FBI agents Harris and Goddard , who ask him to pass on anything he notices at the Newark docks that might concern terrorism. Tony turns his back on them. Christopher finishes his Mafia-themed slasher film , Cleaver . Following the film's premiere in New York City , Tony congratulates Christopher and mingles with the Lupertazzis and the cast at the after-party. Tony does not see it at first, but Carmela notes a similarity between the film's love triangle and Christopher's suspicion that Tony had an affair with Adriana ; Carmela sees the violent murder of the antagonist as Christopher's "revenge fantasy" against Tony. She confronts Christopher; she is doubtful about his depiction of Tony (and also about Adriana's whereabouts). He denies any similarities but is worried about what Tony might think. Christopher asks his screenwriter, J.T. Dolan , to tell Tony that the character was his idea. When J.T. refuses, Christopher hits him over the head with a Humanitas Prize trophy. J.T. then visits the Bada Bing and tells Tony that he stole the characters and plot from the film Born Yesterday . Tony seems to doubt J.T.'s account, but watches Born Yesterday at home. Later, he painfully admits to Dr. Melfi that he believes Christopher despises him, and that Cleaver illustrates his hatred. He recalls being a father figure to Christopher. Melfi asks Tony to cautiously evaluate if he is not "reading into things," but he replies that his sessions with her have taught him enough about the human subconscious. At the baptism of Christopher's daughter, Tony and Chris embrace closely, but their eyes belie the closeness.
The FBI recovers the body of bookie Willie Overall — Tony's first murder—based on information from Soprano family capo Larry Boy Barese . Tony and Paulie drive to Miami to lie low until the heat is off. On the way down, Tony asks Paulie how Johnny heard about Ralphie's joke about his wife—the incident which nearly led to hostilities between New Jersey and New York —but Paulie says he does not know. While Paulie was Tony's role model growing up, Tony now doubts his loyalty and usefulness. In Miami, the two men meet Beansie's Cuban contacts and agree to trade in stolen goods. Tony also arranges a bridge loan of $200,000 from Hesh to cover a string of losing sports bets. Larry tells the FBI that the late Jackie Aprile, Sr. killed Overall. Upon receiving this news, Tony rents a sport fishing boat to celebrate with Paulie. However, Paulie is uneasy as he remembers the killing of Big Pussy on a boat. On the open sea, Tony questions Paulie again about the joke leak; Paulie again denies involvement. Tony glances at a hatchet and some fishing knives, but the tension passes. That night, Paulie has a dream in which he sees Pussy and, in a panic, asks him how he would handle his own death. Back in New Jersey , Paulie sends Tony and Carmela a $2,000 espresso machine ; Tony tells her that they owe their lifestyle to people like Paulie. In New York City , Faustino "Doc" Santoro and his bodyguard are murdered in a hit arranged by Phil , who becomes the new boss of the Lupertazzi family. Junior is visited at his mental care center by his former soldiers Pat Blundetto and Beppy Scerbo . Junior begs them to aid his escape but soon loses his resolve. He returns to his old mob habits, bribing an orderly and organizing an illicit poker game for other patients. Professor Lynch, a patient Junior teases, informs on him and the game is ended. Junior finds an admiring follower in a young patient named Carter Chong , who has been institutionalized for his anger issues. Junior assaults Professor Lynch and is given a new regimen of sedatives. Carter devises a plan to distract the orderlies handing the pills to Junior so that he can covertly throw them away. Some of the drugs were meant to combat Junior's incontinence , and he soon humiliatingly wets himself. The orderly is fired for taking bribes and Junior is threatened with a transfer to a less pleasant, state-run facility if he does not take his medications. He complies with the treatment, much to Carter's disillusionment. Junior tries to make up with him, but calls him "Anthony." At a piano recital, Carter starts throwing paper balls at the pianist; when Junior shows disapproval, Carter becomes enraged and ferociously attacks him. Junior is next seen with the other patients (though not Carter) receiving animal-assisted therapy in the garden. He is in a wheelchair, with one arm in a cast, apart from the others.
Tony's losing streak in sports betting continues. When Hesh asks him about repayment of the $200,000 bridge loan , Tony pretends to have forgotten it and offers to pay the vig . Hesh was not charging interest and is insulted that Tony treats the loan as a mere business transaction. Tony calls Hesh a " shylock " in front of his crew. Later, Hesh says to his son-in-law, "At what point is it cheaper for him to settle it another way?" Carmela sells the spec house with its sub-standard materials to her cousin Brian Cammarata and his pregnant wife. She tells Tony that she has cleared $600,000 and he assumes that half the profit is his. Tony wants to bet it on a "sure thing" but Carmela refuses and he yields to her. The "sure thing" wins, but he reveals to Carmela that he only had $10,000 to bet on it. This leads to a furious argument about money. Tony refers to her taking $40,000 from his stashed savings in their birdfeeder. He manhandles her and she throws her Lladró figurine at him, breaking it. Later, he apologizes and they reconcile after he agrees to control his gambling. She is worried about the many threats they are facing. Tony says he survived being shot: "Big picture-wise, I'm up, way up." Vito's widow, Marie , asks Tony to help her son, Vito Jr. , who has put on weight and begun wearing Goth makeup, deliberately misbehaving since his father's death. Marie requests $100,000 to move her family to Orono, Maine , to start over. Tony is reluctant. Both he and Phil (Marie's second cousin) talk to him, to no effect. When Vito Jr. is expelled for defecating in the school shower, Tony decides to pay for the relocation. However, he gambles away the $100,000 he had reserved for it. Instead, he offers Marie to send Vito Jr. to a boot camp program in Idaho . He plays down her worries about corporal punishment and says he will pay the $18,000 fee. Marie reluctantly accepts and Vito Jr. is taken away against his will by the boot camp's staff , leaving his mother and sister in tears. Driving by, Tony happens to notice Ahmed and Muhammad mingling with traditionally dressed Middle-Easterners on a street. A.J. proposes to Blanca , who reluctantly accepts, but later breaks up with him. Renata, Hesh's girlfriend, dies suddenly. He is grief-stricken. Tony visits him and speaks clichéd words of condolence. He presents a large paper bag, saying, "I brought your money."
A.J. struggles with depression after his breakup with Blanca . He quits his job at the pizzeria, sulks around the house, and makes comments suggesting thoughts of suicide . Carmela persuades him to start therapy. Tony tells Dr. Melfi he was going to permanently quit therapy but decided against it in light of A.J.'s problems. He laments that his son has inherited his "rotten fucking putrid genes". Tony persuades A.J. to attend a party at the Bada Bing with "the two Jasons" – Jason Gervasi and Jason Parisi .  Carmela is angry at first, but later satisfied to see that A.J. is socializing again. He begins to associate with a profitable sports betting business they are running at school. At a frat party, they use A.J.'s SUV to take a kid who owes them money into the woods. They pour sulfuric acid on his toes while A.J. helps hold him down. Tony speaks to FBI Agents Harris and Goddard about Ahmed and Muhammad , who have stopped visiting the Bada Bing, and gives them the cellphone number one of them had used. Christopher and Paulie are selling stolen power tools in a hardware store belonging to Christopher's father-in-law, and dividing the take. However, Christopher is seeing the other members of the crew less than before. At a barbecue that he and Kelli host, Tony tells him that his absence from Soprano family gatherings could be seen as a lack of commitment; Christopher reminds him that he is avoiding such meetings to keep his sobriety , as there is always alcohol around. He tells Tony that his father, Dickie Moltisanti, wasn't much more than "a fucking junkie." Paulie sends Little Paulie and Jason Molinaro to break into the hardware store and steal some items, which they sell to Paulie's Cuban contacts in Miami . Christopher confronts Paulie and demands compensation; Paulie crudely rebuffs him. Tony brushes off Christopher's complaints. Christopher finds himself increasingly sidelined in the family, with Bobby apparently taking his position in Tony's inner circle. When Little Paulie steals again from the hardware store, Christopher tracks him down and throws him out of a third-floor window. He survives, but with six broken vertebrae . Paulie vandalizes Christopher's landscaped front garden with his Cadillac CTS . Tony makes peace between Christopher and Paulie, and the money situation is worked out. The two reconcile their differences at the Bing, where Christopher drinks with Paulie to mark the occasion. Christopher gets drunk and rambles about his daughter, causing Paulie to make some off-color jokes. Christopher thinks everyone is laughing at him, Tony most of all, and abruptly leaves. He goes straight to J.T.'s apartment, but J.T. cannot help him much as he is no longer Christopher's sponsor, he has work to do, and it is dangerous for him to hear the things Christopher starts to tell him. Rebuffing him, he says, "You're in the Mafia ." After a few seconds, Christopher quietly says, "Fine", and begins to walk away, before turning around and killing J.T. with a shot to the head. [2]
A.J.'s therapist sees that the prescribed drugs are working: he is happier and calmer, and taking college courses again. He continues to spend time with Jason Parisi and Jason Gervasi at their frat house . They laugh about Victor, whose toes were amputated after they injured him with sulfuric acid . The two Jasons and others assault a Somali student while A.J. stands by in distress, doing nothing. He relapses into depression. "Why can't we all just get along?" he says to his therapist. Phil discovers that the construction/demolition waste that Tony has been sending to Barone Sanitation contains asbestos. At a meeting in New York, he says that he will not accept any more unless he receives a 25% cut; Tony refuses. As Christopher drives him back to Newark, Tony admits he may have to yield, but the waste is eventually dumped into a lake. Chris is restless as he drives, and Tony looks at him carefully. Their car drifts into the opposite lane, then swerves sharply to avoid an approaching car. They go off the road and the car rolls many times as it descends an embankment. Tony exits the wreckage in pain but with only minor injuries. Chris, who was not wearing a seat belt, is seriously injured, with internal bleeding. He manages to tell Tony to call a taxi as he would not pass a drug test. Tony begins to call 911 for help but abruptly changes his mind. He pinches Chris's nose shut so that he cannot breathe, and he chokes to death on his own blood. Tony dreams that he tells Dr. Melfi that he killed Chris, Pussy , and Tony B . During his actual session, he recalls Chris as a liability and an embarrassment and says he resents having to feign remorse in front of his family. At the wake , he is disgusted by the display of sorrow. He and Carmela also go to the wake of Paulie's adoptive mother Nucci , who has died of a stroke ; Paulie is angered by the poor attendance but appreciates Tony and Carmela's presence. Tony decides to get away to Las Vegas . He meets Sonya, a stripper who was Chris's mistress. They have sex, smoke marijuana, and take peyote . Playing roulette, he has a winning streak. He mumbles, "He's dead," and collapses on the casino floor laughing. With Sonya, he watches the sun rise over the Red Rock Canyon . There is a flash in the sky, and Tony cries: "I get it!"
Tony goes with Silvio and Bobby to a sitdown with Phil in New York . He offers a compromise about the asbestos removal, but Phil rejects it out of hand. In response, Tony takes Phil's men Coco and Butchie off the payroll from another construction project. When they hear of this from the foreman, they viciously beat him up and steal the cash in his wallet. A drunken Coco notices Meadow in a restaurant. He touches her cheek and makes some lewd comments. She reluctantly tells her father. Enraged, Tony finds Coco and pistol-whips and curb stomps him. This assault opens a deep rift between the Soprano and Lupertazzi families . Little Carmine tells Tony that he will once again broker a truce meeting with Phil, who has shut down one of their joint construction projects. Tony admits, "I lost it, timing couldn't have been worse." But Phil refuses to meet with them when they arrive at his home; from behind a second-floor window, he spews profanities as they walk away. FBI Agents Harris and Goddard visit Satriale's and ask Tony to look at some photos. Tony identifies Ahmed and Muhammad . When Dr. Melfi sees Dr. Kupferberg , he shares with her the results of a recent study which has shown that sociopaths are not helped by talk therapy but rather only further enabled by it, perhaps even "sharpening their skills as con men " in the process. Meadow reveals that her new boyfriend is Patrick Parisi, Patsy's eldest son, and that, inspired by him, she has decided to enter law school . A.J. remains depressed. Moved by W. B. Yeats ' apocalyptic poem " The Second Coming ", he tries to kill himself in the family pool. With one foot tied by a rope to a cinder block, and with a plastic bag over his head, he jumps in. But the rope is too long to keep him submerged. He struggles: he can neither drown nor save himself. Tony happens to come home. Hearing shouts, he goes out. He runs and jumps, wearing a suit and tie, into the pool. He saves A.J. and hauls up the cinder block. At first, he is shocked and furious, but A.J. is sobbing; he cradles his son in his lap, saying "Come on, baby, you're all right, baby." A.J. is put on Valium and admitted to a psychiatric ward. At a session with his therapist and his parents, he speaks of resentments going back to 2nd grade, and quotes his grandmother at the end of her life: "It's all a big nothing." This session occurs just after Tony's assault on Coco; as he listens, he notices one of Coco's bloody teeth in the cuff of his pant leg. Tony and Carmela both feel guilty about the attempted suicide, and each blames the other. Tony scornfully rejects Dr. Melfi's suggestion that A.J. was calling for help and, at some level, knew the rope was too long. "He could just be a fucking idiot. Historically, that's been the case." He tells her about his insight on peyote: "I saw … that this and everything we experience is not all there is – there's something else."
A.J. recognizes another patient: Rhiannon Flammer , Hernan O'Brien's old girlfriend, who has had "food issues" and depression. After discharge, they continue seeing each other. Jennifer Melfi is at a dinner party with colleagues, including Elliot Kupferberg . The conversation turns to a recent study claiming criminal sociopaths take advantage of talk therapy . Kupferberg angers and shocks her by revealing that Tony Soprano is her patient. However, she reads the study at home and is convinced of its findings. At his next session, Tony wavers between contempt for A.J.'s depression and gratitude for his in-patient care. Her responses become sarcastic and aggressive. When she says she intends to cease treating him, he is taken aback and hurt: "We're making progress! It's been seven years!" She says, "Since you are in crisis, I don't want to waste your time." She waits for him to go, then closes the door on him. Janice tells Tony that, as far as they can tell, Junior's money has run out, and she asks him to contribute, together with her and Bobby , so that he does not have to go into a state institution. Tony scornfully refuses. Silvio garrotes Soprano soldier Burt Gervasi , who has been negotiating with the New York family. Phil speaks contemptuously to Albie and Butchie about "this pygmy thing over in Jersey". "We decapitate, and do business with whatever's left," he says. "Make it happen."  Butchie and Albie meet with their own subordinates and order the murders of Tony, Silvio, and Bobby to be done swiftly in one 24-hour period. The police learn that something is going on, and Agent Harris warns Tony that his life may be in danger. Tony decides to act first and kill Phil, using the "cousins", the Italian hitmen who performed the hit on Rusty Millio . The order is eventually passed down to Corky Caporale , who makes contact with them. But Phil is in hiding, and they kill the wrong man, the father of Phil's comare — and kill his comare, too. Tony realizes the urgent danger, and orders Silvio to tell everyone in the family to go to their safe house, but it is too late. Almost simultaneously, Bobby is killed in a model railway store  and, leaving the Bada Bing together, Silvio and Patsy are intercepted by two Lupertazzi hit men. Silvio is shot several times and severely wounded; the doctors say he may never regain consciousness. Patsy escapes unhurt. Tony goes home and breaks the news to Carmela. He is going to a safe house; she must go to some other safe place. He goes upstairs to A.J.'s bedroom, where he now spends most of his time. Rhiannon is there and Tony sends her away. A.J. is in bed. Tony tries to explain things gently. When A.J. starts whimpering, he pulls him out of bed and throws him onto the floor. At night, Tony, Paulie, Carlo, Walden Belfiore and Dante Greco drive to an old suburban safe house . Tony goes upstairs and lies down fully clothed, holding the AR-10 assault rifle that Bobby gave him for his birthday. [1] [2]
Tony remains in hiding with his crew. He meets FBI Agent Harris and gives him information about Ahmed and Muhammad in exchange for Phil's location, but Harris does not know anything. Tony visits his family in their safe house and later joins them at Bobby's funeral. Tony then visits Janice at her house, and she tells him she will raise Bobby's children, oblivious to how much they hate her. Later, Harris informs Tony that Phil has been using payphones from gas stations in Oyster Bay , Long Island , and Tony's crew begins surveilling the area. Phil calls Butchie from a payphone, expresses anger about his failure to kill Tony, and rejects Butchie's suggestion to make peace. He also darkly tells Butchie that he will face punishment for his ineffectiveness after Tony is dead. Tony meets with Butchie to negotiate without Phil's knowledge. Butchie refuses to disclose his boss's location, but agrees to a truce and allows Tony to order a hit on Phil, and they also agree to make restitution to Janice and Bobby's family. Shortly after, Tony and his family move back into their North Caldwell home. A.J. is unhappy with their current living situation, but continues to see Rhiannon Flammer despite his insistence to everyone that they're both friends and that she is only 17 years old. The couple are sitting in his car in the forest listening to music. The two attempt to have sex before A.J. notices that his car's engine has caught fire, prompting them to flee before it is entirely engulfed in flames. Tony and Carmela are furious with A.J. once he informs them that his car has been destroyed. A.J. later tells them he intends to join the Army, but they arrange for him to work for Little Carmine's film production company instead. Meadow and Patrick Parisi announce their engagement and that Meadow may land a high-paying job at a law firm that defends white collar criminals, to Tony’s disappointment. Tony visits the comatose Silvio in the hospital. Carlo goes missing, and Paulie fears he may have become an informant after his son Jason Gervasi was arrested on a drug-related charge. Tony's lawyer, Neil Mink, tells Tony that Carlo is likely testifying and that Tony will be indicted. With Carlo gone, Tony offers the leadership of the Aprile crew to Paulie, who initially rejects the offer before reluctantly accepting. Phil Leotardo is dropped off at one of the remaining gas stations with a payphone. As he talks to his wife, he is executed by Soprano's crew who have been watching the location. His wife gets out, screaming, leaving the SUV in drive and it proceeds to roll over Phil's head. Janice visits Junior (who is now toothless and in an advanced state of dementia) to inform him of Bobby's death, but Junior's declining health has left him unable to understand. Uncle Pat tells Tony he believes Janice is scheming to claim Junior's remaining money for herself. Tony visits Junior and tells him to give the money to Bobby's children, but realizes Junior no longer knows who he is. When Tony tries to remind Junior of his mafia life and how he and his brother "ran North Jersey", Junior replies, "Well, that's nice." A teary-eyed Tony leaves. The Sopranos arrange to meet at a diner. Tony tells Carmela that Carlo will testify, while A.J. reminds his father of his advice to "remember the good times." Meadow arrives late after having trouble parking her car. As the diner door opens, the bell rings and Tony looks up. The screen cuts to black.
